I have some stuff I want to do before I jump in, and I also want to talk about what I'm going to do when I jump in so that it's not a complete surprise. So one of the things I want to do, I have a lot of trouble with, which is it's self-promotion. So I'm going to pass these around, these are just bookmarks. It's advertising my novel, and I brought a copy of my novel. So I have a novel, and it's The Blood Throne of Caria, and the reason I'm pushing it, and it makes me feel dirty doing this, so I'm probably just off a little bit, is because I'm ramping up to try and put out another novel, and if I can get a little bump in sales before that happens, it helps me. So if you like that kind of stuff, get my novel. That kind of stuff is historical fiction. I'm particularly obsessed with basically everything from Iran to Italy. That's like my zone where I obsess about. This is set in the 6th century, 5th century, 5th century B.C. in the southwest corner of Turkey. And it's about a real person, so it's historical fiction, but she doesn't have, her name is Artemisia, she doesn't have a lot of, how should we say this, there's a lot of attacks done on her by historians, and so my goal in writing this novel was to figure out what was true and what was a lie, and then correct the lie. But I can't claim it's the truth because it's speculation on my part, so hence historical fiction. Somebody's going to ask at some point what they should read. This is a fun way to start, it's The Crusades Through Arab Eyes, wouldn't that be a novel idea, by Amin Malouf. It's an old book, it's 1985 if I remember correctly, but there, now I've done that part. I also want to dedicate this talk to a group of people, so it's a small list, but I just want to do this. Omar, Saeed, Iman, Iman, Iman, and then Hadi, I'm probably forgetting somebody else I intended. You know what, I'm going to throw Jayden into the mix, he'll be like, oh my god, I can't believe you threw my name in there. I actually have a, I was just gifted a piece of rock from Palestine from the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and so I'm probably going to hold on to it the entire talk because, well, my talk is going to take place in Palestine mostly, so this is kind of a strange thing to have right now. Also, let's see, what did I do with it, I probably already lost it. I brought show and tell, but it won't work because the camera is too small and you're sitting too far away. I actually brought coins from the time period, so I will, after the talk, you can come up and look at it, and then what I'll do is we'll put, for the people who are watching this on video, I'll just put pictures up on it, but just to give you an idea of what I have, this is a coin from William II. It's after the period I'm talking about today because I'm not going to get to him. William II was the king of Sicily. The year in my head is 1153, but who knows. Anyway, the reason I brought it was because I am going to talk about the Normans, and I'm going to talk about Sicily a little bit for background purposes, and I kind of wanted to stick this in your head a little bit. On one side, the coin is written in Latin. On the other side, it's written in Arabic because the Normans took Sicily from the Arabs, and so they just made it so that they were a bilingual society. This, let me see, hold on, I'll do this one here. This coin is going to matter because this is Romanus IV, the Roman emperor. I'm going to talk about him in a little bit of detail, just briefly, because he's going to set things in motion that make the rest of the story possible, and then when you look at the coin, you'll see that the quality of the coin dramatically falls when you get to Alexios Komnenos. Alexios Komnenos becomes the Roman emperor just like 11 years later, and the quality of the coin is terrible compared to this one, so it makes you realize how far into decline the Romans had fallen. One of the things I'm going to do is I'm going to do a little bit of background, and in the process of doing the background talk, I'm going to bring up the birth of the Arab Empire. We don't know what year this coin was minted because it doesn't have a year on it. It's actually a counterfeit coin. The Arabs, when they made their empire, needed coins, and they went and stole a Roman mint, and they began minting coins, Roman coins, so it has Latin letters on the back. It has three Roman emperors, well, an emperor and his two sons on the front. They're holding in one hand a cross, and in the other hand a globus cruciger with a cross sticking out of it, so there's literally six crosses on this coin, and this is the Arab Empire, one of the Arab Empire's first ever coins. It was minted during the Rashadin period. We don't know a date, so I can't tell you who, but most likely it would have been Uthman ibn Affan or the Khalifa Ali ibn Abi Talib. It's probably not one of the earlier two, and then this coin is Muawiyah I. He did the same thing. It's a Roman emperor with two crosses in his hand, and on the back, Latin letters, and one of the reasons why I wanted to sink that into your heads is to also show how the boundary between things is really blurry, right?

We're a society of people who want to put everything into categories, including ourselves. We can't wait to label ourselves, and we keep breaking it down further and further, and the reality is these categories are all imaginary and made up. Nobody is that easy to categorize, you know what I mean, let alone whole societies, especially societies where everything is blurred together. I probably have said Arabic words, for example, that are English in this. I wasn't paying attention, but you know, at one point I might say the word nadir or zenith or zero, and then by contrast, Arabic is filled with Latin words. For example, the word faloos, the word for money, comes from pholos. It literally was, one of those coins was a pholos that I was holding up, and so the word is actually Latin. It's not Arabic. It's just the Arabs used the Latin word. Cres, the word for cherries, comes from crassinus, which is the Latin word for cherry, and it can go on and on because everything is stuck together. All right, so as Eric Deggans would say, I'm going to do a bunch of table setting. Eric Deggans is a TV critic that I listen to on NPR, and he recently complained about too much table setting, but I don't know how to not do table setting, and the reason I have to do the table setting is if I just jump into the Crusades and start talking about it, it'll be entertaining because there's a lot of violence. Like, if you enjoy People Massacred, and I know you do because I watch the same movies you do, then this is a great story because it is gory, but it's kind of helpful to know why it happened, and how did we even get into the situation where it was possible. So I can't skip that. Having said that, I have no intention and no belief that I can, even if I wanted to, cover the entire Crusades. So in other words, this is part one. You're just setting this up now. I will try to do the entire Crusades, but I'm betting I'm going to have to do four parts. One of the reasons I don't know is, some of you have figured this out about me, I don't write my lectures out, so I actually don't know what I'm going to say until it starts happening, and so as a result, I don't know how the timing of this is going to land, so it'll be fun. I'm exploring this with you, and we'll see where it goes. It'll probably be a train wreck, and people will hate it, but it'll be fun for me anyway, and that's the important thing. All right, so, to do this, I need to introduce some actors. The first actor I want to introduce is probably the most important actor in the story, and it's the Arabs. And the reason they're the most important, obviously, is because the Crusaders are going to invade the Arab world to fulfill their goal of making a kingdom of Jerusalem. So, the Arabs created an empire that most people don't refer to, don't talk about, that's basically been deleted from history. It's the Arab empire, although I've frequently heard it referred to as the Muslim empire. The reason you need to not do that and call it the Arab empire is the Arab empire was created by Arabs, like the Roman empire was created by Romans. We don't call it the pagan empire, and when it becomes Christian, we don't call it the Christian empire, right? When it becomes Japanese, we don't call them the Shinto Buddhist empire, you know what I mean? When Alexander the Great made his empire, we don't call it the pagan empire. So, why would we do this in this one particular case? And what I'm going to pose to you is the reason we usually don't even name it, and if we do, we sometimes call it the Muslim empire, is because of anti-Arab hate. We have that running through the core of our society, the core of our civilization, and one of the reasons is because of the events that led to the Crusades and the Crusades themselves. In other words, by doing anti-Arab hate, you're perpetuating this old wound. It's time to let it go. Although, by the time we're done tonight, you'll be like, oh my gosh, what's that about? So, it'll be good. The Arabs began making their empire, and by empire, I mean it in the true sense of the word empire. To be clear, a state that rules multiple countries and nations. That's all you need to be to be an empire. Having said that, you could claim that in the United Kingdom today, what's left of the great empire is still an empire, because Great Britain is Wales, England, and Scotland. That's three countries. And then, throw in Northern Ireland, Gibraltar, Bermuda, and the Falkland Islands and Malvinas, and you end up with multiple countries, right? Or at least pieces of multiple countries. So, they began making their empire in 633, when the first Khalifa, Abu Bakr, launches his armies into the Persian and Roman Empires simultaneously, in what should have been a completely insane, impossible, can't-be-done event. And it's not only done, but by 711, the Arab Empire became the largest empire on the planet to that date. There have been larger empires since, but there had never been a larger empire before this.

It stretched, by 711, from Spain to Pakistan. It went all the way into Central Asia. So, if you can conjure a map of the Roman Empire, it owned about 60% of the Roman Empire. Conjure a map of the Persian Empire, it owned 100% of the Persian Empire. And it went into Central Asia, and it went into India. Fine? For those of you, because I just said Pakistan, for those of you who don't know, the British cruelly and sadistically cut Pakistan out of India. Pakistan is India. It's just, you know how the Brits are. It's divide and conquer, wreck, destroy, ruin. India is named after the Indus River, which is 100% in Pakistan. It's just cruel. You know what I mean? Anyway, so, this Arab Empire, by the way, when it was born, it had a tiny Muslim population. But by 711, it had a few more Muslims. It was maybe 5-10% of the population was Muslim. The empire itself was majority Christian, 60% Christian. In fact, probably somewhere around 60% of the world's entire Christian population was in the Arab Empire. Isn't that hard to comprehend? The majority of the world's Christians lived in the Arab Empire, an empire that was majority Christian. In 711. So, the empire has been around that, right? From 633 to 711, it's already been around for a few decades. It's not like it was just born. One of the reasons why Muslims are such a small percentage of the population is they didn't convert by the sword. There was no compulsion to become Muslim. At first, what the Muslim conquerors did was they said, if you're Christian or Jewish, you worship the book. Therefore, you have a pathway to heaven. So, you have to be treated like a full human. But then, as they kept conquering, they kept running into other religions. And they just kept extending it. So, the Zoroastrians, okay, yeah, why not? And, right, centuries later, by the time they're in India proper, they're like, yeah, Hindus too, it's all good. We're going to make this work. Right? That was what kept happening. By the way, the Arab Empire in 711 was probably about five, ten percent Buddhist, just to mess with you. Afghanistan had a giant Buddhist population. So, it seems counterintuitive, but there it is. That empire gets into a conversation with itself. And the conversation it has with itself stems from a problem that they had. The Arabs had never ruled themselves, let alone ruled an empire, right? Until this moment. 633, the year they launched the empire, is the year the Arabs, for the first time in history, ruled the entire Arabian Peninsula. So, they don't even catch their breath. They conquer the Arabian Peninsula, put it under a single state, and then they just go, they just keep going. Next thing you know, they've conquered the Persian Empire, and they've conquered the majority of the Roman Empire, and they're in France, trying to conquer France. What was the Battle of Tours? 732 is in my head, I hope that's not wrong. So, this empire has a problem. Arabs don't know how to run an empire. They've never run an empire before. Normally, conquerors are arrogant, and they're cruel, and they're sadistic. Like, take the Romans. So, I'm part Italian. So, for those of you that like being mean to Italians, a little bit, but it's okay. Gaius Julius Caesar, the guy you incorrectly called Julius Caesar, when he conquered Gaul, there were three million people living in Gaul. When he left, there was one million people living in Gaul. He murdered one million, he enslaved one million, and then he looked at the remaining million and went, welcome to the Republic. By the way, we'd like for you to worship our gods. Let's have your taxes now. Oh, and we're going to steal your technology. That's what conquerors often did, right? The Arabs, on the other hand, were humble about this, and they told the Romans and the Persians they had conquered, we don't know what we're doing, we don't know how to do this. We want to just leave you where you are. You're a bureaucrat, you're running this province, don't stop, and then we'll watch you. Maybe we'll figure it out, but in a few generations, hopefully we'll have this sorted out. In the meantime, I'm going to counterfeit this money over here. It's got crosses on it, but that's okay. I'm okay with that. I like Jesus. And that was kind of their conversation. So, the reason that matters is Muawiyah, I showed you the coin. Muawiyah I moves the capital after a civil war that lasts five years, that ends in 661. He moves the capital to Damascus from Medina. When he puts the capital in Damascus, he puts it in a former Roman city. And that matters, because it meant that the bureaucrats around Muawiyah are shaping the policies he's creating, and it orients the Arabs in the Arab empire west. It orients them towards the Romans. And in fact, he's going to lay siege to Constantinople. He won't capture it. But then a subsequent Arab the next century is going to do it again, and they'll fail a second time. Had they captured Constantinople on either of those two, they would have taken out the Romans too, because they had already conquered the Persians.

Yazdegerd III was the last Persian emperor. He's gone. Persians are done. But the Romans are still hanging on. For the record, what saved the Romans was the emperor put out a contest. He said, anybody who can invent something that can save us, I will give you a sum of money. A Syrian refugee, isn't that cool? Isn't that weird, a refugee? I thought we were supposed to put them in cages. Anyway, a Syrian refugee invented a flamethrower. So what happened was the Roman Navy had a chain blocking the vulnerable north end of Constantinople. They had a chain that went across, so the Arab Navy couldn't get through it. And the Roman Navy was hiding behind the chain, this big chain. And the Romans pulled up the chain, and the Roman Navy started coming out. The Arabs are like, why are they coming? We'll just sink them. This is suicide. And the Romans came right up on them. And the Arabs had no idea they had flamethrowers. And they just opened up and set the Arab fleet on fire. And that's how they saved Constantinople. Anyway, that's why you should never turn away Syrian refugees. That is the rule on that one. Or is the rule you should make them. Sorry, I went to a dark place. All right, so in 750, there's a coup d'etat. The Abbasids overthrow the Umayyads. And they move the capital to a brand new city that they've just built on a village. The village is called Baghdad. It's a Persian village. And they move the capital to this city. They rename it Medina Tassalam, the City of Peace. And they build this amazing fortress system. It's a two-layer fortress system. It's incredible. The city should be impossible to capture. And science and commerce and philosophy pour into the city. Art pours into the city. And the city grows really fast and becomes a major city really quickly. But it's in Iraq, which was Persian, not necessarily ethnically, by the way. There was a huge Arab population in Syria during Roman period and a huge Arab population in Iraq already. What I mean is it was the Persian Empire. But there were also a lot of Persians as well because they were intermingled. Because you've got to remember, this is a pre-nationalistic society. It's before people went, oh, my DNA is better than DNA by virtue of my race or by virtue of my nation. Back then it was, I was born in this city and that makes me better than you. It was city discrimination, which is fun. We have that a little bit. Like whenever a Houstonian walks up to you, you know he's from. Anyway, so this means that the conversation changes. Because now it's got a Persian orientation because the Abbasids are surrounded by Persian bureaucrats. And those Persian bureaucrats have two agendas. One, to shift the attention of the Arab Empire east. And two, to destroy it. That is their goal. They are going to break this thing. The reason is, is because most of the countries that the Arabs conquered adapted and began to speak Arabic. Or at least there was a large population slowly starting to speak Arabic. Like Arabic probably didn't become the major language in Egypt until about 900 AD. But there was already a population of people speaking Arabic for commercial purposes and for political purposes by this point. The Persians weren't learning Arabic. They were holding onto their identity and their language. They had converted to Islam, but they weren't going to convert to being Arab. So right, ethnically Egyptians aren't actually Arab. But culturally and linguistically, they're 100% Arab. I keep running into conversations with people like, well, Egyptians aren't real Arabs. Oh, do they still speak ancient Egyptian? I miss that. I mean, they do. If you go to a Coptic church and listen to the liturgy, they do it in Coptic. Coptic is ancient Egyptian. Ancient Egyptian is as alive in Egypt as Latin is in Italy. You can hear it. It's not dead dead. It's just mostly dead. Right? And so what it means to be Arab is really more of a linguistic thing than it is an ethnic thing. It's not a DNA thing. It's do you speak Arabic? Well, the Persians rejected that. They refused. They resisted. And so little by little, they start to pick at the Arab empire from within, because they're the bureaucrats running it now. And pieces of the Arab empire start to come off. If I remember correctly, the first piece comes off, well, the first piece comes off in 756. Spain. One of the Umayyads escaped the Abbasids. They massacred the Umayyads. They tried to kill all of them so there would be no rivals out there causing them problems. Well, one of them got away. He snuck through Egypt. He went across North Africa. He went to Spain. And in 756, six years after the Abbasid revolt, he pulls Spain out of the empire. And so the empire is already starting to come apart in 756. I think 727 is the next time a major piece comes out. And that's over in Persia. And little by little, the Arab empire starts to disintegrate. Eventually, it will lose all of North Africa and Persia. And as it's shrinking, the khalifa, the system where you had a person who was a religious and a political authority, is starting to become symbolic.

And they're being replaced by wazirs. They're being placed by ministers. And so there's actually now a secular leader who's running the show. And the khalifa is becoming a symbolic leader who's mostly just confined to a palace in Baghdad and has no meaningful role other than to walk around the garden looking pretty. And by the time that happens, it also means that the person who has the best position symbolically to unify people has no political power, which is bad if you're trying to hold things together. I can't give you an exact date when the Arab empire stops functioning. But it's pretty finished by 900. I've seen the year 833 used as well. I think you can have an argument about when that's happened. By the time the Buyids are running Baghdad, it's over. There's no two ways about it. The Buyids were Persians who had broken out Iraq and a huge chunk of Iran and were ruling it on their own. And of course, the reason that matters now is if there is going to be a European invasion down the road, there isn't an empire to stop it. Well, there will be, because I'm going to have to introduce another actor, and it's the Seljuks. In 1037, a group of Turkish warriors begin to conquer the Middle East. And they create an empire to replace the Arab empire. And that empire is the Seljuk empire. So for the record, Turks are from Central Asia. They are in the same cultural linguistic group as Mongolians, Koreans, and the Japanese. I'm going to let you sit on that one for a moment. I take that in. Japanese, Koreans, Mongolians, and Turks are the same cultural linguistic group. Do this as an exercise. Find a Turk and stand up next to a Korean and have the Koreans start speaking Korean and have the Turks start speaking Turkish. It is crazy cool. It is very, very super cool. You should totally do this experiment. You can. They exist here in Austin. Just start looking for them. The Turks are starting to move into the Middle East for multiple reasons, one of them being they're serving as mercenaries. Another one is they're just looking for land to inhabit. It's a migration. There are immigrants coming in. And by 1037, they're politically in a position where they start conquering. And they end up conquering a huge chunk of the Asian part that the Arab empire had. I'm making this number up because I never measured it. But they probably ended up with about 30% of the Arab empire, maybe a little bit more. Maybe a third of the Arab empire. Let me introduce another actor, the Roman Empire. So I've said this before in lectures. So people who have seen my previous lectures will probably be annoyed with me because I'm just repeating myself. But I have to a little bit because I'm going to assume that you haven't. And that way it makes sense. When I was a kid, when I was an adult, I was taught that the Roman Empire fell on September 4, 476 AD. This is one of my big pet peeves about the way we teach history. The Roman Empire did not fall on September 4, 476 AD. That's just a lie. There's nothing even remotely truthful about it. What happened on September 4 is Romulus Augustus, the Western Roman emperor, took off his purple robes, stuck it in a box with a note attached to the box that said, we don't need two emperors anymore. We just need one emperor. And he sent it to Emperor Zeno. Emperor Romulus Augustus was in Ravenna, Italy. That was the capital of the Western Roman Empire at that time. They had long since abandoned Rome. The city of Rome existed. It was largely empty, though. It had 1 and 1 half million people at its height. And at that point, there were 40,000 people. Can you imagine walking through the streets of a city that at one point had 1 and 1 half million people and there's only 40,000 people there? Talk about ghost town. What was that like? And of course, most of those houses and buildings have collapsed, and they're in ruins. But still, that must have just been a trip. We were great ones. What happened to us? This is terrible. And then you look at the coins, and they were striking at the time. And you're like, dude, what happened to your artists? They all died, too? Find some artists. So what happened was the Roman Empire fell on May 29, 1453. So when you were a kid, probably this happened. It happened to me. People would go, we don't know why the Roman Empire fell. Maybe it was the gladiators. They stopped doing the gladiating like centuries earlier. So probably not. Maybe it was the orgies and the eating festivals. They also stopped doing some of that, too. I mean, they still had a little bit of that going. But not as much as they did during the Republic. That was the height of that. You know what I mean? That was the good old days. So that's probably not it. Lead pipes. If lead pipes was a problem, we're in trouble. I don't know if you know this, but we have lead pipes in the United States. All the urban centers have lead pipes, as Flint found out. So probably not the lead pipes, either. For the record, what happens is hard water calcifies the inside of the lead pipes, and then the lead is no longer a problem because there's basically a salt layer inside the pipe protecting you from the lead.

But then your city council decides they don't have enough money. Why? Because we went through a tax-cutting frenzy because somebody went, taxes are evil. They pay for things like water. What do you mean taxes are evil? Roads. Where do you think roads come from? Schools. Schools are also taxes. Hospitals, scientific research, police departments, fire departments. It's not the Libertarian Ferry that delivers that stuff. That's taxes. Unless you're lucky and you had a bunch of oil, like Texas does. Anyway, but it's OK. We keep our electric grid functioning just as well as Egypt does. So that's amazing. It's fun living in a third world country again. You know what I mean? It's very familiar. I go to Mexico in the summer so I have electricity. Also, by the way, it's cooler. Push that through your brain. I still can't get over that. I'm very confused about that. So I've derailed myself. Why did I go down that path? So here's what happened. I was taught we don't know why the Romans collapsed. But we do know why the Romans collapsed. And the reason we know why the Romans collapsed is because I can actually tell you the exact day the Romans collapsed. I don't know what it's telling me. Actually, it's telling me you need to go. The Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453. The reason why the Romans collapsed on May 20, you thought I was kidding, the reason why the Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453, and I can tell you exactly why, is because an Ottoman army captured the last Roman capital, Constantinople. Constantinople was the last piece of Roman real estate. In other words, there's no mystery why the Romans fell apart, the Roman Empire fell apart. It fell apart because it was conquered. And we know the exact moment it was conquered. In other words, there's no reason to have doubt about the date that the Roman Empire fell. Here's what happened. There was a guy named Hieronymus Wulf. About a hundred years after the Roman Empire fell, and I want to say a hundred years, but that's probably wrong, somewhere around 1550, right? The Roman Empire fell 1453. He decided he was going to rewrite history on purpose and tell a really big lie on purpose. He had two goals. One, he wanted to divorce the Roman Empire from its ignominious defeat at the hands of the Muslims. The Roman Empire was a Christian empire. He was a Christian. He was a German. And he hated the idea that Muslims had conquered the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire had been defeated by Ottoman Turks. And so he decided he was going to move the date of the conquest of the Roman Empire to a hundred years earlier, lie to everybody, and people would accept the lie because it would divorce the end of the Roman Empire from the Muslims. And then the second goal was, in 476, Odo Vakur, the German, declared himself the king of Italy. Now, to be clear, he left Italy in the Roman Empire. He didn't separate Italy from the Roman Empire. So Italy just became, instead of a set of provinces, it became one kingdom with Odo Vakur, the ruler, who sent taxes to Emperor Zeno and flew a Roman flag. It's weird, but it also means Italy is still in the Roman Empire. But because Odo Vakur was a German, then Hieronymus Wolf could say, the Germans took out the Roman Empire. But it's not true. It's a lie. It's a bald-faced lie. So by the time we get to the Crusades, there's a Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire is playing a major role. And the reason the Roman Empire is playing a major role is it's been in decline for a long time. When I say the Roman Empire fell in 1453, you have to remember that's after 2,200 years. The Romans aren't quite as long as the Egyptians in terms of the length of their history, right? When the Romans conquered Egypt in 31 BC, Egypt was a 4,500-year-old civilization, right? It's not quite on that scale, but it's really close. It's half that scale. And Rome had been in decline since the 200s. In other words, Rome had been on its way out for 13 centuries. So for more than half of the length of time that Rome had been around, it was struggling to survive. That's what you call tenacity, resilience. That's incredible. Who survives barely making it for that long? At one point, they actually do get conquered. And they manage to put themselves back together and reconstitute themselves and just keep going. They break up on multiple occasions. Zenobia is my favorite. There was a woman who led a rebellion in Syria, and she captured Syria, Turkey, Palestine, and Egypt, and she made her own little empire. They were too sexist to let a woman rule, so she made her six-year-old son the actual emperor. But she ruled, and his name was Wabalathus. Wabalathus. Isn't that a cool name? Anyway, and by the way, Palmyra was her capital. So sort of a strange twist, right? She was like in the middle of Syria, made her capital there. Don't worry, the Romans killed her. Something like that's not going to be allowed. And they put the empire back together, and then it fell apart. It was like an accordion.

The Arabs come, tear them up. The Germans tear them up. It's a mess. The Huns tear them up. The Bulgarians tear them up. It's just wave after wave until they finally just go down once and for all in 1453. But by the time the story of the Crusades is happening, the Romans are desperately trying to hold on to what is today Turkey. I'm going to use Anatolia just because I think it makes it a little bit less confusing, at least in my brain. Anatolia was the name at the time. Turkey is the name today because it's the Turks' habit, right? They've named it after themselves. Another actor I want to introduce might sound strange. It's the Vikings. I'm going to tell you something really strange. The Vikings are one of the reasons why the Crusades happened. Isn't that weird? You're like, wait, why? Work with me here on this one because it's kind of strange. So the Vikings were Germans. They were the Germans who settled Scandinavia. Scandinavia was kind of like the worst piece of real estate in Europe at the time. Today, obviously, it's like heaven. But back then, it was the garbage piece that nobody wanted to go to. In other words, the people who became the Vikings, they never called themselves Viking. Viking is a term we've retroactively put on top of them, like the term Byzantine that Hieronymus Wolf came up with for the Roman Empire's last 1,000 years, 977 years for those of you who want it to be more precise. There's no such thing as a Byzantine Empire. The Vikings, I'm going to use the term Viking anyway, though. The Vikings got stuck with this piece of real estate where you really couldn't grow a crop. So pretty much all you could do was raise cattle and go fishing. And at some point, their population had reached a threshold. They had sort of reached the carrying capacity of cheese rolls and dried fish. And when that happened, they had no choice but to start looking for alternatives. And they took two approaches, by the way. One approach the Vikings did was they set out to start trading. They thought, you know what? We can fix our problem if we can do trade, because we'll have the money to buy the food that we need. And the Eastern Vikings, the Swedes, got so into this, they actually started trying to figure out where they could go to. And they started reading their sagas. This is the 8th century. Not reading their sagas. They were oral histories. They were listening to their sagas. And the sagas told the Vikings that the place the Germans were from was Iran. By the way, Kermani-Iran, which is where we get the word German, because ga and ka, when languages change over time, are interchangeable. So Kerman, German. We say German because we pronounce it like a French person would. But a German says German, right? So if you're saying the study of Germanic studies, it's Germanismus, because they don't say it the way a French person would. So the sagas tell the Vikings you're originally from Persia. So the Swedes go, wow, that's an idea. Let's go. Let's see what we can find. And so what they would do is they would go to what is today Latvia. They would take their long ships up the Dvina River. They'd go as far inland as you could get, pretty close to the city of Rzhev. They would pull their ships out of the water, fully loaded, because they have to carry their supplies. They can't leave the supplies behind. So they would carry these fully loaded ships over land until they got to the Volga River. I mean, that's a pretty manly, you know what I mean? Like, they've got their armor and their weapons. And they're hauling these. I want to go backwards in time just to see this. You know there was a lot of grunting. And then they put the ship in the Volga River. And they sailed the Volga River all the way to the Caspian Sea. And they went down the Caspian Sea to the Persian coast. And they're like, hi. And the Arabs had just conquered Persia a couple of centuries earlier. And they're walking around Persia going, what is all this? You have modern agriculture and modern medicine. And you're doing philosophy. And you've invented zero. And you're doing algebra. And the Vikings are like, we don't even have a written language. We shouldn't have left. We could have had this. And they began trading. Now, to supplement their trading on that long trade route, they would also raid. And they would attack the Slavic populations along the way. And they would take some for slaves. And then they would sell them into the slave markets, make a little bit of extra koi. So maybe that. Full disclosure, I'm a quarter Swedish. So if there's a little bit too much admiration on my part, it's just ugly nationalism. The Western Vikings started raiding England. And then they started expanding where they raided. And before you knew it, they were just raiding all of northern and Western Europe. And in the process, they start to get some amazing victories. So you know, London Bridge is falling down, falling down. That's because it did. That's because my ancestors took out London Bridge.

That song is based on a real event. Isn't that cool? I think it is. And so the Vikings actually end up conquering places like England. They get multiple kings of England. Cnut the Great, of course, the most famous. But there's also Svein Forkbeard. Isn't that a cool name? Svein Forkbeard. And they end up ruling this empire that stretches across Scandinavia and England. And they were doing all right for themselves. And they got their eyes on Paris. And they thought, you know what? Let's go take France. I don't know why not. We've got Latvia and Estonia and Finland and Ukraine, right? Because the Vikings, eventually the Ukrainian nobles couldn't figure out how to rule their lands. So they started hiring Viking mercenaries. The group of Viking mercenaries they hired were the Rus, R-U-S. And the Rus eventually created Kievan Rus because they realized they were the only armed guys. And they didn't know why they were taking orders from anybody. And they just took over. And that's how Russia was founded. Isn't that crazy? Anyway, they almost got Paris. Long story short, they were on the island. They were battering down doors. They were scaling the walls. They almost got Paris. It was so close. And so after they failed to get Paris, the French came out. And they went, OK, that was too close. You almost got us. If you get a second shot, we don't think we're making it. So what do we do? We're not surrendering, surrendering. We're not giving you Paris. We're going to make you fight for it if you try to get it again. But we really don't want you to try again. We're going to meet you somewhere. And they make a deal with a guy named Rollo. And the deal is Northern France. They give Rollo Northern France. Now the Vikings, I told you, weren't called Vikings. They were called the Northmen, or depending on your language, Norsemen, or Nordmen, or Normans. And so the Vikings named Northern France after themselves. They called it Normandy. And they began ruling it. But they had a problem. And that was that the French peasants wouldn't learn German. They wouldn't learn to speak the dialects of German that the Vikings were speaking. They kept insisting on speaking French. And so the Norman nobility, Rollo, by the way, got Normandy in 911. The Norman nobility now has to learn French so that when they're abusing their peasants, the peasants understand the abuse. It doesn't help to shout at a peasant and then they don't understand you. You need them to understand. So they learn French. And what that does then is it sets us up for a really strange set of events. Somebody gets a great idea just a few decades later, 999, so 911 to 999, so 88 years later, to hire Norman mercenaries in southern Italy. And so Norman mercenaries start to travel from Northern France all the way to southern Italy. And they're being used by everybody. They're being used by the Romans, who are trying to hold on to southern Italy. They had it. They're losing it. They're trying to get it back. The Roman emperor at the time is a guy named Basil II. You want to laugh, but he was one of the greatest Roman emperors of the time period. And he went on a conquering spree and he starts carving up territory that the Romans had lost and he's putting it back in, including taking lands, Muslim lands. He actually brings the Roman Empire back to Syria and he captures Antioch and the northern end of Syria. The part of Syria that today is in Turkey is basically what he recaptured. So when the Ottoman Empire broke up, the Europeans showed up with a crayon and a napkin and they just began drawing borders. And you look at the border between Saudi Arabia and Jordan or Jordan and Iraq and you're like, why'd you do that? And they sneezed or something. Somebody got bumped and an extra wiggle line popped up. And they did that with Syria. They just chopped off the northern part and gave it to Turkey. So Basel II is re-carving the Roman Empire, but at the same time, there's all these forces pushing back and everybody's using Normans as mercenaries. That must have been awkward. You see your cousin on the other side. How much are you getting paid? And you fight for a little while. I'll pretend to kill you, OK? Don't swing at me. What eventually happens is those Normans go, why are we fighting for these other guys? And in 1030, the first Norman gets made a lord in southern Italy. And he slowly starts to conquer. And subsequent generations of Normans start to take pieces of southern Italy. And in 1061, the Normans are getting on ships and they're crossing over to Sicily. And they begin conquering Sicily. Sicily had been conquered by the Arabs two centuries earlier. The Normans also start getting hired by the Roman Empire in Anatolia, because they're being used to fight the Seljuks, who are coming west and fighting their way into Anatolia. And so the Romans are using these Norman mercenaries in, I showed you the coin of Romanus IV. In 1071, Romanus IV has an army at a place called Manzikert. And they fight a battle against the Seljuks.

And they're defeated. The Romans are defeated. The Normans take off after they were defeated. They just move out of the way. But the Romans get captured, including Romanus IV. He was taken. The Seljuks offered a ransom. The Romans are like, no, we don't ransom you. And they replaced him. The reason that mattered was the Norman commander, Russel de Baerl, decides he's going to do in Anatolia, in the middle of Turkey, by the way, Galatia. So right in the New Testament, Galatians, those are the letters that Paul writes to the Celts living in Anatolia. He decides he's going to carve out a little kingdom for himself in Galatia. And the Normans go on a conquering spree. And they make Ankara, Ankara, the capital of a Norman kingdom in the middle of Turkey. There are French-speaking Vikings ruling the middle of Turkey, which is historically populated by Celts. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. Historically populated by Celts, you know, kilt-wearing, bagpipe-playing Celts, because everything is actually intermingled and there's no boundaries. And the next thing you know, the Roman emperor is actually turning to the Seljuks and going, dude, can you help us with this guy? And the Seljuks, the ruler, the sultan, the sultanate of Rome, that's what they call themselves. Their flag was a two-headed eagle. The Roman flag was a two-headed eagle. Because when Emperor Romulus Augustus takes off his purple robes and sends it to Emperor Zeno, they've now unified the west and the east. They only have one emperor. So their new symbol for the Roman Empire is an eagle with two heads, one facing left, one facing right. Well, the Seljuks in Anatolia take that as their flag because their goal isn't to destroy the Roman Empire. It's to make a Muslim Roman Empire. Their goal is to eventually capture Constantinople one day. They don't hate the Roman Empire. They admire the Roman Empire. They want to be the Roman Empire. And so Suleiman I, the Seljuk sultanate of Rome, gets a request from the emperor, the Roman emperor, to go put down this Norman uprising. And he's baffled out of his mind. But yeah, sure, I'll help you. And in 1077, that Norman little kingdom vanishes. In 1084, the pope asks for an army to attack Spain. Spain was, at that time, majority-controlled by Muslims. The furthest north city that the Muslims owned in 1084 was a city called Barbastro. And so the pope asks for a Christian army to go to Barbastro and take it. One quarter of that army was a group of Normans. When they capture the city at first, they're pillaging it. They're slaughtering people. But the Normans decide they like the place and they stay. And the majority of the population is still Arab and it's still Muslim. And the Normans who stay start dressing like the Arabs. And they learn Arabic. And they're really digging Arab society. And they go Injun. And they go native. And it shocks everybody because it's like, wait, these French-speaking, blue-eyed, blonde Vikings are in Spain learning Muslim culture. And in a way, when you think about it, all three of these events that I just described are like little precursor crusades. In 1095, the pope holds two conventions. Both of them were in November. And Alexius Comnenus, Alexius I, the Roman Empire, comes to Italy. And this isn't a small thing because Italy isn't Roman. In fact, the pope in Rome and the Roman Empire have had a falling out that has lasted centuries. And they hate each other's guts a lot, not a little bit, a lot. So what happened was, as the Roman Empire was disintegrating, they managed to hold onto pieces of Italy, including the city of Rome. But the pope in Rome didn't like that because the original church had five patriarchs. So the Orthodox Catholic Church. Orthodox is truth. Catholic is universal. So the Universal Truth Church, that was the original name of the Christian church. It had already had a schism. The Copts in Egypt had broken away in 284. But in the 700s, the church was still unified. But the pope in Rome came to resent the circumstances because the five patriarchs were the pope in Rome, the pope in Alexandria, the patriarch of Antioch, and the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Jerusalem. In other words, the original Christian church had five heads, two popes, two patriarchs, and an archbishop. By the way, pope came from the pope would have his child on his knee. And then people would come to kiss his ring. And they would hear the child saying, papa, papa. And it just stuck. Do you want me to say that again? The pope would have his child on his knee. You know, his kid. His kid, because the original Catholic Church didn't have a celibacy thing. They did the celibacy thing later so that they could make sure that the clergy didn't pass churches and church property down in their wills and illegitimate children in Europe couldn't inherit. So that's how that, that's why that happened.

It wasn't to stop the popes from having babies. It was to stop the popes from having legitimate babies. It wasn't to stop the clergy from having families. It's just to stop the clergy from having legitimate families so they couldn't pass on church land. So anyway, in 756, the pope in Rome is sick of the fact that he's kind of second fiddle. He wants to be first fiddle. After all, it's Rome. It's Roman Empire. So he goes and he makes a deal with the Franks. And they break Rome out of the Roman Empire. It's Pope Stephen II who does this in 756. 763, Naples was still in the Roman Empire. Duke Stephen II, two different guys, same name, makes it easy to remember. 763, Naples breaks out of the Roman Empire and joins the pope in creating this papal state thing. Naples is never part of the papal states, but the idea that it's now going to be a separate thing from the Roman Empire, it breaks away. And the animosity between Rome and Constantinople just keeps growing and growing and growing until 1058. In 1058, they get into a spat that's so bitter and so nasty, they start to excommunicate each other. The patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates the pope. The pope excommunicates the patriarch. Next thing you know, they're interdicting. Interdicting is when you excommunicate whole cities, whole countries, whole regions, whole provinces. They start interdicting each other. And before they're done, Western Europe has completely interdicted Eastern Europe. And Eastern Europe has completely interdicted Western Europe. And the East took the truth, and the West took the universe. And that's why there's a Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, and a Greek Orthodox church. So when Alexios Komnenos goes to Italy in 1095, it's 37 years after they had just done this to each other. So the wounds are raw. They're fresh. And the reason Alexios Komnenos is there is he says, we're not making it. The sultanate of Rome has just taken almost all of Anatolia. We maybe have 10% of it left. We're finished to the east, which means all we have is a little piece of Southeastern Europe. We need your help. And Pope Urban II goes, you know what we should do? We shouldn't just help you a little bit. We should go all out. Let's retake the Holy Land and put it back in the Roman Empire. And Alexios Komnenos goes, yeah, why not? Let's do it. Let's make this happen. And so Pope Urban II comes out of those two talks, meeting with these top officials, including the Roman emperor, and says, I want an army to go to Jerusalem. We're going to conquer all of that and put it back in the Roman Empire. Let's go. 1096, a guy named Peter the Hermit gets up in front of everybody and says, we heard the pope loud and clear. Let's do this. And he puts together what's called the People's Crusade. It's basically just a bunch of peasants, some knights. It's not the mercenary soldiers. It's not the knight. It's not all knights, right? It's just some peasants. They turn into a mob. And the first thing they do to sanctify the Crusades, this holy religious war, is they attack the Jews living in Germany. And the estimate is they murder about 2,000 Jews, and then they rape like 7,000 more Jews. And then they leave Germany on their way to the Holy Land to... I missed something. I feel like they read a piece of the New Testament that I... Did I? Where does it say that? Before thou goest on the crusade, holiest of holy, do what Jesus would have you do, slaughter Jews in Germany. Did I? And that is the first pogrom. That is the first documented case where Europeans, specifically post-Roman Empire, the Roman Empire hated Jews. Just like it was a hobby for them. They mostly did it in Palestine, right? It was just, ah, the Jews again. They keep throwing rocks at us. That's going to be ironic in a few centuries. So that's the first pogrom. 1096. That army works its way all the way to Constantinople. When it gets to Constantinople, Alexios Komnenos, they've been raiding the whole way because they need to feed themselves. So they're sacking villages. They're tearing into people's food stores. It's a disaster. It's a raiding mob. It shows up at Constantinople. Alexios Komnenos is like, I got to get rid of these guys as fast as I can. He goes, you know what you got to do? You got to cross the Bosporus. Here's my fleet. He puts them on a ship and he sends them across the Bosporus and they set up a camp. They actually attack a town. They capture it. And he's like, I'll send you food. You just stay on your side of the Bosporus. This is going to work out great. In the meantime, he's actually calling the Turks on the phone. Hey, there's some crazy dudes. I just deposited them on your end. Good luck with that. The guy who's now the son of Suleiman I, his name is Khalid Arslan. He decides he's got to get rid of these guys. And they want to take Nicaea. So Nicaea is pronounced Nicaea. I'm going to not say Nicaea again for the rest of the lecture. It drives me nuts. It's like Julius Caesar is Gaius Julius Caesar.

Stop saying Julius Caesar. I feel like it could be a salad dressing or something. You know what I mean? It doesn't have to be the name of that guy. Nicaea was the capital for the Sultanate of Rome. So they actually put it almost across from Constantinople. And the reason is because that's their goal. It's Constantinople. They're nowhere near capturing it. They know that. But that's still, you know, it's nice to have a goal, even if it's a far off one. And so they've got Nicaea. It's like poison. And the mob, the peasant mob, the People's Crusade, as it's called, thinks it's going to capture Nicaea. And Clege Arslan basically sets up an ambush for them and slaughters them. And that's the end of the People's Crusade, for the most part. By the way, some of the leadership got away. Because, of course, that's how that usually works out. In any case, the real Crusader army doesn't show up until the next year. The real Crusader army is a mixture of nobles from across France and Germany, primarily, but also Italy, because there's Normans coming. So for our purposes, there's a bunch of Crusaders. There's too many. There's too many names. So I'm just going to simplify it a little bit. The Crusaders you need to know about are Bohemond of Toronto, not Canada, but Italy, and then his nephew, Tancred, and Godfrey de Bouillon, and Baldwin de Bologna. Baldwin and Godfrey are both from northern France. They weren't actually Normans, but they had definitely sided with the Normans. Their father, Eustace II, in fact, was with William the Conqueror in 1066 when the Normans decided to also conquer England. The Normans were very busy people. Oh, let's go to Spain. You know what? I southern it. Anatolia. England. In other words, long after the Vikings started speaking French, they're still tearing up the planet. They're on this permanent, multi-century rampage. And it wasn't enough for them that they had captured England already twice. They wanted it a third time. They're like, this is good real estate. We want it back. And they got it. And so when Godfrey and Baldwin go on this crusade, they're not actually Normans, but they're part of the Norman sphere. So in a way, the top four of the five most important Crusaders are Normans. The fifth guy is a guy named Raimond. He's Raimond of Toulouse, also known as Raimond Saint-Gilles. He was Raimond the Fourth of Toulouse. And they show up. And Alexius, there's also Hugh de Vermandois. There's a few other guys. But I just want you to know those five. They show up at Constantinople. And they swear an oath of fealty. Well, not Tancred. He refuses. He wants nothing to do with this. And what they promise is that all the land they capture will be handed to Alexius Comnenus, the Roman emperor. And of course, they're lying through their teeth. They have no intention whatsoever of handing anything over. Their goal is to go in there, carve off land, and make their own little personal fiefdoms. They cross over the Bosporus with the Roman navy. It's 1097. Khalid Arslan isn't there to greet them. He's in southern Turkey fighting another Turk. And the reason is that Turk was trying to capture a city from an Armenian, Malatya. And Khalid Arslan was worried if Danishmen captured Malatya, it would put his position, it would weaken his position. So even though he's got this crusader threat on the west, he's so focused on his rivals that he's actually fighting them. He turns around when he realizes the crusaders have landed. He goes as fast as he can. By the time he gets there, Nicaea has already fallen. He convinces other Turks in the area to fight alongside him. They fight the crusaders at Doraleum. And they're defeated. And Khalid Arslan has to withdraw. And they just watch as the crusader army passes. The crusader army then goes through Armenia. So when the Roman Empire lost Anatolia, a piece of the Roman Empire broke away and didn't get captured by the Muslims and remained its own separate thing. It was oftentimes called Lesser Armenia. It was a little Armenian kingdom on what is today the southern coast of Turkey. And so the crusaders arrived there. Tancred was the kind of guy who would look at a situation and he would size it up real quick. He decides to basically conquer it. And he just goes and grabs all the strategic points in Lesser Armenia. And in the process, he's running into Baldwin. Baldwin has the same idea, but he's a little slower. So he keeps arriving after Tancred has done this. And the problem then is Baldwin has the bigger army. So he shows up and Tancred has a problem. Do I fight my fellow crusader, who's basically telling me he's taking my thing from me, or do I walk away? So the first time he walks away, the second time he fights. The crusaders have barely started the crusade and they're already fighting each other. Not many people die for the record. I want to say it was like two guys died and a few dozen are wounded. And then they call off the fight and they negotiate and they make a deal.

But still, you can see there's already problems. They get over the mountains, the Tarsus Mountains, and they arrive at Antioch. Antioch is the first prize. So Antioch had only just been captured by the Muslims in 1084. So by the time that the crusaders have arrived, it's 1098. They set up a siege. But Baldwin decides, ah, not interested. And he takes off to the east and he goes to a city called Edessa and he puts Edessa under, he tries to capture Edessa. He doesn't put it under siege. He tries to capture Edessa. And Edessa was ruled by Armenians. And so Baldwin goes to the Armenians and he starts working out a deal with them. The leader of the Armenians in Edessa was a guy named Thoros. And Baldwin talks Thoros into adopting him and then letting him marry Thoros' daughter so that he will become now the heir to Edessa. And Thoros goes, okay. Well, Armenian culture was that when you, presumably, one of the chroniclers says this. I'm not sure it's actually true. That's one of the problems you always have when you're reading historical accounts. You're always like, mm, did that really happen? According to the chronicler, Armenian culture was when you got adopted, your adoptive father and mother wore a really big gown and then you would take off your top, you'd have pants on, and then you would crawl under the gown, but they're completely naked under, and you hug them. Anyway, so apparently that's what Baldwin did with Thoros and his wife. And then he waited around for a while until a mob grabbed Thoros and his wife and hanged them. And that's the birth of the first crusader state. We now have the county of Edessa. Baldwin is the first crusader lord to rule a chunk of territory. I think it was May 1098. In the meantime, the siege in Antioch is still going on. Bohemond is the guy who wants Antioch for himself, but so does Raimond. So there's now two crusaders both pushing for it, but the problem is they still gotta capture it first. They haven't captured it. The guy who was the ruler of Antioch was a guy named Yarhisian. And Yarhisian starts putting out feelers to see if he can get help to break this, the crusader siege. And there's two guys nearby. There's the guy who's running Damascus, because even though they're part of the Seljuk Empire, the Seljuk Empire is already coming apart at the seams. The Seljuk warlords don't like each other. They don't cooperate. They see each other as rivals. They're constantly backstabbing each other. And the guy in charge of Damascus is a guy named Dukak. And Dukak's brother, Ridwan, is the guy in charge of Aleppo. They hate each other's guts. They see each other as rivals. So Yarhisian sends for help from Dukak. Dukak takes an army, and he has to go past Aleppo, right? And he's coming up past Aleppo. He gets to line of sight of the crusader army. He panics. He turns around, and he heads back to Damascus. So Yarhisian is like, oh, what do I do? I guess I have to talk to Ridwan. But he doesn't want anything to do with Ridwan, because Ridwan has a group of allies that he didn't like. The Hashishans. The Hashishans were Shia who decided they didn't like the direction Islam was going in. Sunnis were systematically winning. The Seljuks were Sunnis. And the Seljuks had replaced the Buyids, who were Shia, and had been defeating the Fatimids, not replace them. The Fatimids were also Shia. And so there is this guy, Hassan al-Sabah, who decides he wants to take a different approach to fight for the Shia cause. And that different approach is he's going to get into political intrigue, spying, and assassinating people. And Hashishan is where we get the word assassin from. Now, whether or not they used Hashish, we don't really know. That could have been the chroniclers trying to make a story up. In any case, Hassan al-Sabah's followers were total fanatics. And Ridwan, the ruler of Aleppo, was totally into them. And they were friends. And they were working together. And so this scares Hashishan. So he doesn't really want anything to do with this. He asks Ridwan to send an army. And Ridwan does pretty much the same thing Dukak does. And nothing comes of it. So Hashishan realizes he's running out of food. He's running out of time. But so are the crusaders. The crusaders are literally starving to death. They've been traveling for months. It's a year now. And they're running out of supplies. And they've been slaughtering their horses along the way. For food purposes, they're down to like 800 horses. And probably half the crusader army is already gone by this point. Some of them died. Some of them got sick. Some of them broke a leg. Some of them just were like, you know what? I don't need this. And they turned around and they headed home. So now, you can see on the inside, Antioch is desperate because he's trying to figure out how he's going to get through this. And the crusaders like Bohemond and Rahamund are trying to figure out how they're going to get in the walls. And at that point, another guy jumps into the story.

And the other guy is the ruler of Mosul, Karbuka. Karbuka, this Yahishan convinces Karbuka to come with an army. But Karbuka has to pass Edessa on the way. And he's looking at Edessa. And he goes, this Baldwin has it. I want it. And so he stops his army. For three weeks, he parks it outside of Edessa. And then he decides he can't take it. And so he abandons the siege. And he heads to Antioch. But by the time he gets to Antioch, his generals are working against him. And so there's all this intrigue going on before he even gets to Antioch. But even though he's still heading to Antioch, it's kind of too late. Because in the meantime, because he took so long, because he added those three weeks, there was a guy named Firuz. Firuz was accused of dealing on the black market even though he knew and was a friend of Yahishan. And so he gets charged a heavy fine. He's so furious about this that he decides to betray his own people. Firuz tells the crusaders, I'm going to let you in to the city. The crusaders are like, why would we believe you? This is probably a trap. He goes, I'm going to give you my son. If it's a trap, kill my son. Crusaders are like, really? OK. Why are you doing this? He goes, I want land, gold, and vengeance. They go, OK. We can give you all three of those. And so in the night, he had access to a window that looked out over the walls. And he just dropped a really long rope down. And the crusaders came up the rope one at a time till there were about 500 guys inside the city. And they began fighting for the gate. Yahishan hears the sound. He panics. He jumps on a horse. And he rides off. He leaves his son and wife and family behind. He just takes off. He doesn't even assess the situation. He just figures, it's over. I'm out of here. He rides for days. He finally collapses from riding. His entourage try to put him back on the horse. They can't get him back on the horse. He's having a depression bout or something. He just lays on the side of the road. A peasant walks by, recognizes who he is, and cuts his head off and takes it to the crusaders and gets a reward. In the meantime, Yahishan's son, Shams al-Daula, son of the state, sun as in the thing in the sky, not child. Shams al-Daula, isn't that a cool name? Who would name their kid that? Anyway, Shams is beautiful, but of the state? Anyway, he's got the citadel, and he's holding on to it. He's like, OK, they've got the city. But he's also watching what the crusaders are doing in the city. They're not kind conquerors. They're not walking through and going, oh, hi, everybody. How's it going? They are murdering everybody. They're just going through the streets, slaughtering the inhabitants of Antioch. They're killing the men. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the poor. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the women. They're killing the babies. They're leaving nobody. And Shams is up there in the citadel going, what? Who are these people? Why are they doing this? Why wouldn't you want the city intact, somebody to tax, somebody to work for you? Why are you slaughtering the city? And there's nothing you can do about it except resist and hold on to the citadel. That's when Karbuka's army shows up. Too late. Shams actually sneaks out of the city to go meet with him to try and coordinate what's going to happen next. How are they going to fight for the city? Because he hasn't given up. Karbuka fires him on the spot. He goes, you're done. You're not going back to the citadel. He then sets up his army to fight. But the princes who are with him fear, Dukak and Ridwan, that if he succeeds, he will then be able to establish authority over Aleppo and Damascus. And so they actually pull off the field and start heading home. And when the rest of his army sees this, they lose heart. The crusaders see what's happening. They see them pulling away. So they come running out of the gate because the crusaders had just found the lance that speared Jesus. The Romans check to see if he's dead by spearing him. Because if fluid comes out, it means he's drowned in his own fluids. Because that's the goal of crucifixion, is to drown you slowly. And they found the lance that did this. It's not probably, right? Probably what happened was a monk took a lance and buried it and said, I'm pretty sure it's somewhere around here. You guys should dig for it. They dig. They find it. They're like, it's a miracle. And they come charging out of the city towards Kabuka's army. His army's morale has collapsed. His morale has collapsed. They just turn and run away. And the crusaders don't pursue them because they think it must be a trap because they can't figure out why the larger army just ran away for no reason. And then they have their city. There's a brief struggle between Raimond and Bohemond. Bohemond wins. And Bohemond gets to keep Antioch. And then the rest of the crusaders go, we're not here for Antioch. We're here for Jerusalem. Let's keep going. Bohemond goes, I'm good.

I got what I wanted. I just wanted one of the richest cities on the planet. Although it's not rich anymore because you just killed its inhabitants. Anyway, I don't understand. They start marching to Jerusalem. The next city they come upon is a town called Ma'ara. When they arrive at Ma'ara, the population fights as hard as they can. So it's soldiers and citizens holding onto the city as hard as they can. But eventually the crusaders get in and they capture the city. When they do, the crusaders murder all 20,000 inhabitants and eat them. So there's multiple sources that say this on both sides. It's always good to have both sides saying it. I know of three sources that are from the crusader side that say they ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. And they describe it in slightly different ways, but it's mostly the same. One of them says that they spit at the adults and the children and just roasted them over a fire. Another one says that they would cut chunks of flesh off of them and then roast the individual pieces over a fire. But it's pretty widespread agreement that the crusaders ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. But there's a lesson in this story that applies to today. So one of the things people will do who want to defend an indefensible position is they'll find something to nitpick. So one of the crusaders says that the people were tortured first, one of the crusader chronicles. But none of the Muslim chronicles say that the people were tortured first. And so what I've seen happen, even on BBC, is somebody will say, well, they may have eaten the people, but they didn't torture them. So first of all, I think if you slaughter 20,000 people, including the children in front of the parents, that's torture. But then second, I kind of don't care if that crusader's chronicles said there was torture and there wasn't or not, because I still think there was a horrible crime committed here. Why are you focusing on that one thing? So no Muslims are saying there was torture. Only one crusader was saying there was torture. Nobody's having an argument with you, dude. There's no, sure, there's no torture. They just killed them and ate them. The reason I'm bringing this up is you see this kind of nitpicking. Like, for example, with the Holocaust, Holocaust deniers, I have seen, focus on the number. So for the record, it wasn't 6 million Jews. It was probably 5.1 to 5.4. 6 million is a slight exaggeration. It's not a big exaggeration, but it's a slight exaggeration. So the Holocaust deniers would focus on the number. Well, it wasn't 6 million. If you just take the 5.1, you took away their ability to do this. And now you can, well, how about the 5.1? And then there's nowhere they can go, because that's the number. The 5.4 is also a number, possibly. But just go with the low. 5.1 is already a horrific, nightmarish, hellish, evil. It doesn't have to be 6. You see what I'm saying? It doesn't have to have been torture. We're good with it just being cannibalism. So be careful when you're arguing, when you're dealing with people. What is that called? I feel like it's distraction. It's not gaslighting. It's a little different thing. It's like, yeah, but what about? Anyway, the Crusaders then approached Tarabulus, Tripoli. It was one of the wealthiest cities on the planet at the time. So was Antioch, by the way, but not anymore. Tarabulus had a library in it with 100,000 books. It was ruled by a qadi, as opposed to a guy who took the title of maybe king or something. It was ruled by a guy who had the title, basically, judge, which is kind of cool. And the city was rich. It had these big walls around it. The Crusaders set up a siege. There was no point. There was no way they were getting in. So they bypass it. And then they decide, you know what? Let's just keep bypassing. We have Antioch. We have Edessa. We have Ma'ara. Let's just go straight to Jerusalem. Why are we capturing anything else? So they bypass Beirut. They bypass Arsuf, Acre. They just don't deal with any of it. Sur, Fayda, they go straight to Jerusalem. When they get there, they immediately attack it. They don't have any ladders. They don't have any siege equipment. This city has a wall on it. It has a citadel. So the Crusaders just go like a mob, charging up to the thing. And they're like banging on. And the defenders are pouring oil on them, shooting them with arrows, going, they can't get in here. Why are they doing this? And hundreds of them are wounded and killed for no effect. So then the Crusaders set up a siege. The problem is that Jerusalem is brilliantly designed to not be siegeable. So all the sprigs are inside the wall. So the area around it is arid. So the army stuck trying to besiege this thing basically has to run a water line to the Jordan River and by bucket bring the water to the army. That's a tough thing to do. But that's what they're going to do. And they're praying. They're hoping that God will intercede and give them a break. And it may not have been God, but it was the Genovese.

The Genovese show up with some English volunteers by ship. And the Genovese brought the material needed to build siege equipment. They build the siege equipment, and they attack the city. So a little bit of, I'm going to bring in another actor, another player. So Egypt had been taken over by the Fatimids. The Fatimids were Shia who had started in North Africa. They took over Egypt. By the way, they found Cairo, 969. Cairo is just barely over 1,000 years old. It's such a baby for the Middle East, right? Middle Easters go, oh, you're 1,000? Oh, you're so young. You're so young. Your whole life is ahead of you. Of course, Cairo is a mega massive city. It's the sixth largest metropolitan area on the planet. There's only three metropolitan areas on the planet that aren't in Asia that are in the top 10. Cairo, Sao Paulo in Brazil, and Mexico City are the three that aren't in Asia. Everything else is Shanghai and Tokyo and Calcutta. You know what I mean? So the Fatimids are doing all right, but something really weird is happening. The Fatimids hated the Seljuks, but the Fatimids liked the Romans. They were allies. So when this whole crusade thing happened, in the mind of the Fatimids, who had just lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks a few years earlier, what's going to happen is the crusaders, who are technically in the service of the Roman Empire, are going to split that land. Syria will go to the Romans. Palestine will go to Egypt. That's what they're thinking is going to happen. So they decide, let's go grab Jerusalem from the Seljuks before the crusaders arrive to do our part in this alliance. They have an explicit alliance with Rome. This isn't like they're speculating. This is the deal that they've made with Alexios Komnenos. And so they send an army. They defeat the Seljuks. They capture Jerusalem. And then they send an envoy to meet with the crusaders. And the crusaders just keep coming. And the Egyptians are like, what are you doing? No, no, you stay on that side. That's the deal. We're going to split this. And the crusaders just keep coming. And it becomes clear to the Fatimids, they're going to fight. They're allies. So they dig in. And that's when the siege equipment comes and the crusaders break in. And the Egyptian general in command of the defense of Jerusalem, Iftikhar, is looking at this going, how do I fight this now that the crusaders have a sectional wall? And so he retreats his men to the citadel. Once they're in the citadel, there's nothing he can do for the population of Jerusalem. All he can do is he can hold on. It's basically a thorn in their side. He's going to make it so that the crusaders can't control Jerusalem, but they can control parts of Jerusalem. And he won't control any of the merchant part of Jerusalem, the commerce part of Jerusalem. He'll just have a military piece. And eventually, he'll run out of supplies. And their goal is to fight to the death. There's no point. They saw what happened at Ma'ara, and they saw what happened at Antioch. They know who the crusaders are. They're supposed to be allies. They're being backstabbed. They get it. But the crusaders really want the city. And so they start negotiating. And the deal that they come up with, Raymond Saint-Gilles comes up with, is the following, that the Egyptians will leave in groups of five. They'll leave the citadel, and then they'll exit the city five at a time. That way, if the crusaders break their word, turn on them, they'll only kill those five dudes who are in the middle of leaving. And then the guys that are still in the citadel, they can just keep fighting. And anybody who escaped has already escaped. And that's the deal. So the first five go, and then another five, and another five. And you know the last five were like, oh, god, you know they're going to turn on us. But they don't. And the last five get away. And then the crusaders go over to the gate, and they close it. They go over to the Muslim quarter, and they just begin murdering everybody. They're just walking through the city, slaughtering person after person. Tancred, the guy that I talked about, with the strategic mind who kept running into trouble with Baldwin until Baldwin took Edessa, he can't take it. He's like, what are we doing? He runs over to a group of Muslims who were running. And he's like, whoa, whoa, I'm not going to kill you. He hands them his banner. And he says, if crusaders approach you, say you're with Tancred. And show them my banner, and they won't harm you. And they're, of course, grateful. And then he just sort of runs around the city trying to figure out what to loot and how to save people's lives. He hasn't given up the looting. Don't be naive about this. But he's also like, let's not just murder everybody. And he describes in his own memoir, later on coming upon that group of Muslims laying there dead on his bloody banner. The crusaders didn't even care. They're just like, you're with Tancred? A group of Muslims realize there's no surviving this.

This is over. So they decide, let's go to the mosque. Let's die praying. And so they barricade themselves inside the mosques. The crusaders eventually smash the doors open. They slaughter everybody inside. They get buckets of water. They wash the blood out. They go to the top of the minaret. They break the crescent moon off, and they stick a cross on top. They say a prayer. Boom. Insta-church. Then they go to the Jewish quarter. Because see, Jerusalem was in four quarters. A Muslim quarter, two Christian quarters, and a Jewish quarter. Why are the crusaders here? So that Christians can own Jerusalem. Because clearly they could be there if they had half the city. Not interesting. So they go to the Jewish quarter. And the Jews know what's coming. It's not rocket science here. So they just start running to synagogues. They figure, you know, let's do like those Muslims did. We'll die in prayer. The crusaders believed that Jews were so horrible, so evil, you couldn't wash out the synagogue afterwards and turn it into a church. So they just piled wood around the synagogues and burned them to the ground, burning the Jews inside alive. And then they go to the two Christian quarters. And of course, at this point, the Christian population is peeing itself. Because it's just watched half the city get exterminated. And they go, you have the true cross, where is it? And the Christians go, we're not telling you. You're savages. And the crusaders go, OK, we got you. And they start murdering the Christian clergy. They're like, who's a priest? Let's have your priest. And they just start slaughtering the priests. They're like, when we're done, we're going to do the deacons. And then we're going to start working on your families. Eventually, somebody tells them, here's the true cross. Please stop killing us. And they stop massacring the Christians as well. But then they turn to the Christians and go, remember that great schism in 1058? These Catholic priests are your new priests. Get used to it. We're not doing that anymore. Your orthodox ways are out. And they're like, yeah, whatever. And that's how the crusaders captured Jerusalem. Isn't that a heartwarming story? Is that too much sarcasm? At that point, the Egyptians are trying to figure out what to do. They send an army to Ascalon with the hope that they'll eventually be able to come back and fight to capture Jerusalem back. Godfrey is named the new ruler of Jerusalem. He does not take the title king. So he's just the ruler. We'll get to that later. He takes his army. He runs to Ascalon. And the Egyptians were in disarray. They weren't expecting this. And so they weren't set up properly. And he attacks them within their disarray. And a bunch of them fall back. They drop into the fortress. The rest of them escape. And the crusaders get another win. They don't capture Ascalon. But they definitely humiliate the Egyptian army and buy themselves some time. The Egyptians aren't done. Their leader is a guy named Al-Aftal Shahanshah. Now, Shahanshah is not Arabic. It's Persian. But Al-Aftal is. The best leader of leaders is his name. Dude, if you have that as your name, you need to get into politics. That's incredible. That's incredible. Anyway, so Al-Aftal is actually a slave. Isn't that weird? And he's actually Armenian. So the guy running the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt, it has a caliph, a khalifa. It has a Shia khalifa. The guy running it is actually an Armenian slave. There's an actual khalifa who's a Shia Arab. But the guy running it, the wazir, is an Armenian slave named the best leader of leaders. And he's like, we're not doing this. He sends an army. They attack Ramla. Godfrey is dead. Godfrey dies. We don't know why. There's one person says that he was killed in battle. Another person said he got sick. Another person said he was poisoned. Godfrey's dead. He was literally the ruler of Jerusalem for a year. He's replaced by Baldwin, the guy that captured Edessa. He comes down. It's his brother. So the chronicler said that when Baldwin received the news, he was very happy, but also a little sad that his brother had died. And he comes down, and he's crowned king. And that's the moment in the year 1100 that the kingdom of Jerusalem is officially going, because there's now a king. But Godfrey was at 1099 when they captured Jerusalem. He meets Al-Afdal at Ramla in 1101. And he defeats the Egyptian army. The Egyptian army withdraws. They come back the next year, because Al-Afdal is not going to give up easily. They attack Ramla. And this time, they beat the crusaders. The crusaders fall to Jaffa. And in the second battle at Jaffa, the crusaders win again. The Egyptians withdraw. They come back in 1105 to do it again. They attack Ramla. And they're defeated a third time. And the Egyptians give it a rest. They're like, OK, we're exhausted losing. In the meantime, something really critical happens for the purposes of how the crusades are going to unfold. And it's the Battle of Haran.

So Haran used to be called Karhaye. Karhaye is where the Romans fought the Persians for the first time in 53 BC. And the Romans were, I mean, just summarily defeated. It was a catastrophe. 26,000 Romans against 8,000 Persians. And the Persians maybe lost like 100, 150. And the Romans lost like 13,000 dead, 10,000 captured. So the crusaders are going to do another Karhaye, only the city's been renamed Haran. And the Muslim army comes out to meet it at Haran. It's southeast of Edessa. And the crusaders are defeated. They are beaten in the field. And in fact, one of the crusaders is captured. His name is Baldwin. But it's a different Baldwin. It's not the king of Jerusalem. It's his cousin. I think it's his cousin. And his cousin's name was Baldwin Borsk. That's what's in my, Borsk, I think is what it was. And he's become the count of Edessa when Baldwin becomes the king of Jerusalem. And so he goes into captivity. And he's stuck in captivity for four years. And while he's in captivity, Bohemond himself also gets captured. And he ends up in captivity. So there's two crusaders that are now out of the picture because they've been captured. And then Raimon decides he wants Terabolus. So Raimon was probably supposed to become the king. But for whatever reason, he decided he didn't want to be the king of Jerusalem. He wanted to be the king of Terabolus. So what he did was he set up a siege for Terabolus after they captured Jerusalem in 1102. And he's built a fortress north of Terabolus. And he's fighting day after day. The defenders of Tripoli come out late in 1104. They set his fortress on fire. Raimon himself is severely injured in the fire. He survives it but dies like three or four months later from his wounds. So the crusaders have now lost basically three, four of their top crusaders. Godfrey is dead. Raimon is dead. Bohemond is in captivity. Baldwin, spoiler alert, who will become Baldwin II, who will become the second king of Jerusalem, is in captivity. So that's a weird story, obviously. And so they're in trouble. By this point, most of the crusaders have actually gone home. In other words, if the Muslims had just attacked in an organized fashion at that moment, there was nothing to stop them from just taking it all back. But the Muslims are in such disarray. And each of these Turkish warlords, these Seljuk warlords, hates each other's guts so much they just won't cooperate together. It gets so weird that at some point, 1108, there's going to be a battle. Baldwin gets released. And Baldwin is going to make a deal with the ruler of Mosul. And he's going to field an army. So it's going to be a crusader army next to a Seljuk army. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight against each other. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight Tancred. Tancred ended up becoming the regent of Edessa while Baldwin was in prison. Tancred doesn't want to give it up. He doesn't want Baldwin to come back. Tancred goes and he gets Ridwan, the guy from Aleppo. So there's a Tancred. The crusader has a Muslim ally. And they're next to each other in the field. And they're going to fight a battle against a Muslim crusader army. And by the way, they defeat Jawali and Baldwin. They have to escape. And Tancred basically keeps Edessa as a result. He's eventually talked into participating in the siege of Tarabulus. They're going to actually try and take it once and for all. And when he does that, he reconciles with Baldwin. But here we are. It's 1108. The crusaders just captured Jerusalem nine years earlier. And there's a battle where there's Muslims and crusaders on both sides fighting each other. Like, it's already gone sideways in every way you can imagine. And that's the first part of the Crusades. Having said that, there's so much more to this story, which is what I warned you from the beginning. Like, I am not going to get through the Crusades. I literally got you to 1108. By the way, my goal was 1125. But I think I'm basically out of time. So I'm surrendering and accepting I'm not going to get to my goal. But to put things in perspective, the second crusade is 1145. The kingdom of Jerusalem is going to go down in a ball of flames. In case you didn't know that, I hope I didn't spoil this for you. But in 1187, after the Battle of Hattin. So then the third crusade is after that. And then there's a fourth crusade in 1202. And so in other words, the Crusades are just going to keep going for a while. And they actually don't end by most people's. The usual number we use is 1291. So it's 195 years. I've just covered nine of it. Well, 12 if you include the, well, even more. 13 if you include the peasant crusade. By the way, there's supposedly a children crusade in this. It's a lot of fun. The Crusades were great. I'm going to tell you the children crusade. I'm going to let you go. It happens later. So this is out of time sequence. But it's just too fun since I mentioned it. A group of children think if they go and just show up in Jerusalem, the Muslims will give it back.

Because this is after the Battle of Hattin. So they don't, children obviously walking from France to Palestine is a little tricky. So what they do is they walk to Venice. And they show up. And they ask, will you, the Venetian Navy, just take us? And the Venetians go, yeah, of course. It would be our sacred duty to take you. And the children are never heard from again. They were sold into slavery. The Venetians just put them on the ships, took them to slave markets, and just. Isn't that just capitalism? I'm pretty sure that's just capitalism. All right. Thank you for your time. And if you want to come see my show and tell, I'll stick around to let you do that. And actually, you know what? I'll field a question. And then I'll let you go. How about that? I always forget to do that. I actually don't always. No? No questions? OK, good. We're done.

I have some stuff I want to do before I jump in, and I also want to talk about what I'm going to do when I jump in so that it's not a complete surprise. So one of the things I want to do, I have a lot of trouble with, which is it's self-promotion. So I'm going to pass these around, these are just bookmarks. It's advertising my novel, and I brought a copy of my novel. So I have a novel, and it's The Blood Throne of Caria, and the reason I'm pushing it, and it makes me feel dirty doing this, so I'm probably just off a little bit, is because I'm ramping up to try and put out another novel, and if I can get a little bump in sales before that happens, it helps me. So if you like that kind of stuff, get my novel. That kind of stuff is historical fiction. I'm particularly obsessed with basically everything from Iran to Italy. That's like my zone where I obsess about. This is set in the 6th century, 5th century, 5th century B.C. in the southwest corner of Turkey. And it's about a real person, so it's historical fiction, but she doesn't have, her name is Artemisia, she doesn't have a lot of, how should we say this, there's a lot of attacks done on her by historians, and so my goal in writing this novel was to figure out what was true and what was a lie, and then correct the lie. But I can't claim it's the truth because it's speculation on my part, so hence historical fiction. Somebody's going to ask at some point what they should read. This is a fun way to start, it's The Crusades Through Arab Eyes, wouldn't that be a novel idea, by Amin Malouf. It's an old book, it's 1985 if I remember correctly, but there, now I've done that part. I also want to dedicate this talk to a group of people, so it's a small list, but I just want to do this. Omar, Saeed, Iman, Iman, Iman, and then Hadi, I'm probably forgetting somebody else I intended. You know what, I'm going to throw Jayden into the mix, he'll be like, oh my god, I can't believe you threw my name in there. I actually have a, I was just gifted a piece of rock from Palestine from the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and so I'm probably going to hold on to it the entire talk because, well, my talk is going to take place in Palestine mostly, so this is kind of a strange thing to have right now. Also, let's see, what did I do with it, I probably already lost it. I brought show and tell, but it won't work because the camera is too small and you're sitting too far away. I actually brought coins from the time period, so I will, after the talk, you can come up and look at it, and then what I'll do is we'll put, for the people who are watching this on video, I'll just put pictures up on it, but just to give you an idea of what I have, this is a coin from William II. It's after the period I'm talking about today because I'm not going to get to him. William II was the king of Sicily. The year in my head is 1153, but who knows. Anyway, the reason I brought it was because I am going to talk about the Normans, and I'm going to talk about Sicily a little bit for background purposes, and I kind of wanted to stick this in your head a little bit. On one side, the coin is written in Latin. On the other side, it's written in Arabic because the Normans took Sicily from the Arabs, and so they just made it so that they were a bilingual society. This, let me see, hold on, I'll do this one here. This coin is going to matter because this is Romanus IV, the Roman emperor. I'm going to talk about him in a little bit of detail, just briefly, because he's going to set things in motion that make the rest of the story possible, and then when you look at the coin, you'll see that the quality of the coin dramatically falls when you get to Alexios Komnenos. Alexios Komnenos becomes the Roman emperor just like 11 years later, and the quality of the coin is terrible compared to this one, so it makes you realize how far into decline the Romans had fallen. One of the things I'm going to do is I'm going to do a little bit of background, and in the process of doing the background talk, I'm going to bring up the birth of the Arab Empire.

We don't know what year this coin was minted because it doesn't have a year on it. It's actually a counterfeit coin. The Arabs, when they made their empire, needed coins, and they went and stole a Roman mint, and they began minting coins, Roman coins, so it has Latin letters on the back. It has three Roman emperors, well, an emperor and his two sons on the front. They're holding in one hand a cross, and in the other hand a globus cruciger with a cross sticking out of it, so there's literally six crosses on this coin, and this is the Arab Empire, one of the Arab Empire's first ever coins. It was minted during the Rashadin period. We don't know a date, so I can't tell you who, but most likely it would have been Uthman ibn Affan or the Khalifa Ali ibn Abi Talib. It's probably not one of the earlier two, and then this coin is Muawiyah I. He did the same thing. It's a Roman emperor with two crosses in his hand, and on the back, Latin letters, and one of the reasons why I wanted to sink that into your heads is to also show how the boundary between things is really blurry, right? We're a society of people who want to put everything into categories, including ourselves. We can't wait to label ourselves, and we keep breaking it down further and further, and the reality is these categories are all imaginary and made up. Nobody is that easy to categorize, you know what I mean, let alone whole societies, especially societies where everything is blurred together. I probably have said Arabic words, for example, that are English in this. I wasn't paying attention, but you know, at one point I might say the word nadir or zenith or zero, and then by contrast, Arabic is filled with Latin words. For example, the word faloos, the word for money, comes from pholos. It literally was, one of those coins was a pholos that I was holding up, and so the word is actually Latin. It's not Arabic. It's just the Arabs used the Latin word. Cres, the word for cherries, comes from crassinus, which is the Latin word for cherry, and it can go on and on because everything is stuck together. All right, so as Eric Deggans would say, I'm going to do a bunch of table setting. Eric Deggans is a TV critic that I listen to on NPR, and he recently complained about too much table setting, but I don't know how to not do table setting, and the reason I have to do the table setting is if I just jump into the Crusades and start talking about it, it'll be entertaining because there's a lot of violence. Like, if you enjoy People Massacred, and I know you do because I watch the same movies you do, then this is a great story because it is gory, but it's kind of helpful to know why it happened, and how did we even get into the situation where it was possible. So I can't skip that. Having said that, I have no intention and no belief that I can, even if I wanted to, cover the entire Crusades. So in other words, this is part one. You're just setting this up now. I will try to do the entire Crusades, but I'm betting I'm going to have to do four parts. One of the reasons I don't know is, some of you have figured this out about me, I don't write my lectures out, so I actually don't know what I'm going to say until it starts happening, and so as a result, I don't know how the timing of this is going to land, so it'll be fun. I'm exploring this with you, and we'll see where it goes. It'll probably be a train wreck, and people will hate it, but it'll be fun for me anyway, and that's the important thing. All right, so, to do this, I need to introduce some actors. The first actor I want to introduce is probably the most important actor in the story, and it's the Arabs. And the reason they're the most important, obviously, is because the Crusaders are going to invade the Arab world to fulfill their goal of making a kingdom of Jerusalem. So, the Arabs created an empire that most people don't refer to, don't talk about, that's basically been deleted from history. It's the Arab empire, although I've frequently heard it referred to as the Muslim empire.

The reason you need to not do that and call it the Arab empire is the Arab empire was created by Arabs, like the Roman empire was created by Romans. We don't call it the pagan empire, and when it becomes Christian, we don't call it the Christian empire, right? When it becomes Japanese, we don't call them the Shinto Buddhist empire, you know what I mean? When Alexander the Great made his empire, we don't call it the pagan empire. So, why would we do this in this one particular case? And what I'm going to pose to you is the reason we usually don't even name it, and if we do, we sometimes call it the Muslim empire, is because of anti-Arab hate. We have that running through the core of our society, the core of our civilization, and one of the reasons is because of the events that led to the Crusades and the Crusades themselves. In other words, by doing anti-Arab hate, you're perpetuating this old wound. It's time to let it go. Although, by the time we're done tonight, you'll be like, oh my gosh, what's that about? So, it'll be good. The Arabs began making their empire, and by empire, I mean it in the true sense of the word empire. To be clear, a state that rules multiple countries and nations. That's all you need to be to be an empire. Having said that, you could claim that in the United Kingdom today, what's left of the great empire is still an empire, because Great Britain is Wales, England, and Scotland. That's three countries. And then, throw in Northern Ireland, Gibraltar, Bermuda, and the Falkland Islands and Malvinas, and you end up with multiple countries, right? Or at least pieces of multiple countries. So, they began making their empire in 633, when the first Khalifa, Abu Bakr, launches his armies into the Persian and Roman Empires simultaneously, in what should have been a completely insane, impossible, can't-be-done event. And it's not only done, but by 711, the Arab Empire became the largest empire on the planet to that date. There have been larger empires since, but there had never been a larger empire before this. It stretched, by 711, from Spain to Pakistan. It went all the way into Central Asia. So, if you can conjure a map of the Roman Empire, it owned about 60% of the Roman Empire. Conjure a map of the Persian Empire, it owned 100% of the Persian Empire. And it went into Central Asia, and it went into India. Fine? For those of you, because I just said Pakistan, for those of you who don't know, the British cruelly and sadistically cut Pakistan out of India. Pakistan is India. It's just, you know how the Brits are. It's divide and conquer, wreck, destroy, ruin. India is named after the Indus River, which is 100% in Pakistan. It's just cruel. You know what I mean? Anyway, so, this Arab Empire, by the way, when it was born, it had a tiny Muslim population. But by 711, it had a few more Muslims. It was maybe 5-10% of the population was Muslim. The empire itself was majority Christian, 60% Christian. In fact, probably somewhere around 60% of the world's entire Christian population was in the Arab Empire. Isn't that hard to comprehend? The majority of the world's Christians lived in the Arab Empire, an empire that was majority Christian. In 711. So, the empire has been around that, right? From 633 to 711, it's already been around for a few decades. It's not like it was just born. One of the reasons why Muslims are such a small percentage of the population is they didn't convert by the sword. There was no compulsion to become Muslim. At first, what the Muslim conquerors did was they said, if you're Christian or Jewish, you worship the book. Therefore, you have a pathway to heaven. So, you have to be treated like a full human. But then, as they kept conquering, they kept running into other religions. And they just kept extending it. So, the Zoroastrians, okay, yeah, why not? And, right, centuries later, by the time they're in India proper, they're like, yeah, Hindus too, it's all good. We're going to make this work. Right?

That was what kept happening. By the way, the Arab Empire in 711 was probably about five, ten percent Buddhist, just to mess with you. Afghanistan had a giant Buddhist population. So, it seems counterintuitive, but there it is. That empire gets into a conversation with itself. And the conversation it has with itself stems from a problem that they had. The Arabs had never ruled themselves, let alone ruled an empire, right? Until this moment. 633, the year they launched the empire, is the year the Arabs, for the first time in history, ruled the entire Arabian Peninsula. So, they don't even catch their breath. They conquer the Arabian Peninsula, put it under a single state, and then they just go, they just keep going. Next thing you know, they've conquered the Persian Empire, and they've conquered the majority of the Roman Empire, and they're in France, trying to conquer France. What was the Battle of Tours? 732 is in my head, I hope that's not wrong. So, this empire has a problem. Arabs don't know how to run an empire. They've never run an empire before. Normally, conquerors are arrogant, and they're cruel, and they're sadistic. Like, take the Romans. So, I'm part Italian. So, for those of you that like being mean to Italians, a little bit, but it's okay. Gaius Julius Caesar, the guy you incorrectly called Julius Caesar, when he conquered Gaul, there were three million people living in Gaul. When he left, there was one million people living in Gaul. He murdered one million, he enslaved one million, and then he looked at the remaining million and went, welcome to the Republic. By the way, we'd like for you to worship our gods. Let's have your taxes now. Oh, and we're going to steal your technology. That's what conquerors often did, right? The Arabs, on the other hand, were humble about this, and they told the Romans and the Persians they had conquered, we don't know what we're doing, we don't know how to do this. We want to just leave you where you are. You're a bureaucrat, you're running this province, don't stop, and then we'll watch you. Maybe we'll figure it out, but in a few generations, hopefully we'll have this sorted out. In the meantime, I'm going to counterfeit this money over here. It's got crosses on it, but that's okay. I'm okay with that. I like Jesus. And that was kind of their conversation. So, the reason that matters is Muawiyah, I showed you the coin. Muawiyah I moves the capital after a civil war that lasts five years, that ends in 661. He moves the capital to Damascus from Medina. When he puts the capital in Damascus, he puts it in a former Roman city. And that matters, because it meant that the bureaucrats around Muawiyah are shaping the policies he's creating, and it orients the Arabs in the Arab empire west. It orients them towards the Romans. And in fact, he's going to lay siege to Constantinople. He won't capture it. But then a subsequent Arab the next century is going to do it again, and they'll fail a second time. Had they captured Constantinople on either of those two, they would have taken out the Romans too, because they had already conquered the Persians. Yazdegerd III was the last Persian emperor. He's gone. Persians are done. But the Romans are still hanging on. For the record, what saved the Romans was the emperor put out a contest. He said, anybody who can invent something that can save us, I will give you a sum of money. A Syrian refugee, isn't that cool? Isn't that weird, a refugee? I thought we were supposed to put them in cages. Anyway, a Syrian refugee invented a flamethrower. So what happened was the Roman Navy had a chain blocking the vulnerable north end of Constantinople. They had a chain that went across, so the Arab Navy couldn't get through it. And the Roman Navy was hiding behind the chain, this big chain. And the Romans pulled up the chain, and the Roman Navy started coming out. The Arabs are like, why are they coming? We'll just sink them. This is suicide. And the Romans came right up on them.

And the Arabs had no idea they had flamethrowers. And they just opened up and set the Arab fleet on fire. And that's how they saved Constantinople. Anyway, that's why you should never turn away Syrian refugees. That is the rule on that one. Or is the rule you should make them. Sorry, I went to a dark place. All right, so in 750, there's a coup d'etat. The Abbasids overthrow the Umayyads. And they move the capital to a brand new city that they've just built on a village. The village is called Baghdad. It's a Persian village. And they move the capital to this city. They rename it Medina Tassalam, the City of Peace. And they build this amazing fortress system. It's a two-layer fortress system. It's incredible. The city should be impossible to capture. And science and commerce and philosophy pour into the city. Art pours into the city. And the city grows really fast and becomes a major city really quickly. But it's in Iraq, which was Persian, not necessarily ethnically, by the way. There was a huge Arab population in Syria during Roman period and a huge Arab population in Iraq already. What I mean is it was the Persian Empire. But there were also a lot of Persians as well because they were intermingled. Because you've got to remember, this is a pre-nationalistic society. It's before people went, oh, my DNA is better than DNA by virtue of my race or by virtue of my nation. Back then it was, I was born in this city and that makes me better than you. It was city discrimination, which is fun. We have that a little bit. Like whenever a Houstonian walks up to you, you know he's from. Anyway, so this means that the conversation changes. Because now it's got a Persian orientation because the Abbasids are surrounded by Persian bureaucrats. And those Persian bureaucrats have two agendas. One, to shift the attention of the Arab Empire east. And two, to destroy it. That is their goal. They are going to break this thing. The reason is, is because most of the countries that the Arabs conquered adapted and began to speak Arabic. Or at least there was a large population slowly starting to speak Arabic. Like Arabic probably didn't become the major language in Egypt until about 900 AD. But there was already a population of people speaking Arabic for commercial purposes and for political purposes by this point. The Persians weren't learning Arabic. They were holding onto their identity and their language. They had converted to Islam, but they weren't going to convert to being Arab. So right, ethnically Egyptians aren't actually Arab. But culturally and linguistically, they're 100% Arab. I keep running into conversations with people like, well, Egyptians aren't real Arabs. Oh, do they still speak ancient Egyptian? I miss that. I mean, they do. If you go to a Coptic church and listen to the liturgy, they do it in Coptic. Coptic is ancient Egyptian. Ancient Egyptian is as alive in Egypt as Latin is in Italy. You can hear it. It's not dead dead. It's just mostly dead. Right? And so what it means to be Arab is really more of a linguistic thing than it is an ethnic thing. It's not a DNA thing. It's do you speak Arabic? Well, the Persians rejected that. They refused. They resisted. And so little by little, they start to pick at the Arab empire from within, because they're the bureaucrats running it now. And pieces of the Arab empire start to come off. If I remember correctly, the first piece comes off, well, the first piece comes off in 756. Spain. One of the Umayyads escaped the Abbasids. They massacred the Umayyads. They tried to kill all of them so there would be no rivals out there causing them problems. Well, one of them got away. He snuck through Egypt. He went across North Africa. He went to Spain. And in 756, six years after the Abbasid revolt, he pulls Spain out of the empire. And so the empire is already starting to come apart in 756. I think 727 is the next time a major piece comes out. And that's over in Persia. And little by little, the Arab empire starts to disintegrate.

Eventually, it will lose all of North Africa and Persia. And as it's shrinking, the khalifa, the system where you had a person who was a religious and a political authority, is starting to become symbolic. And they're being replaced by wazirs. They're being placed by ministers. And so there's actually now a secular leader who's running the show. And the khalifa is becoming a symbolic leader who's mostly just confined to a palace in Baghdad and has no meaningful role other than to walk around the garden looking pretty. And by the time that happens, it also means that the person who has the best position symbolically to unify people has no political power, which is bad if you're trying to hold things together. I can't give you an exact date when the Arab empire stops functioning. But it's pretty finished by 900. I've seen the year 833 used as well. I think you can have an argument about when that's happened. By the time the Buyids are running Baghdad, it's over. There's no two ways about it. The Buyids were Persians who had broken out Iraq and a huge chunk of Iran and were ruling it on their own. And of course, the reason that matters now is if there is going to be a European invasion down the road, there isn't an empire to stop it. Well, there will be, because I'm going to have to introduce another actor, and it's the Seljuks. In 1037, a group of Turkish warriors begin to conquer the Middle East. And they create an empire to replace the Arab empire. And that empire is the Seljuk empire. So for the record, Turks are from Central Asia. They are in the same cultural linguistic group as Mongolians, Koreans, and the Japanese. I'm going to let you sit on that one for a moment. I take that in. Japanese, Koreans, Mongolians, and Turks are the same cultural linguistic group. Do this as an exercise. Find a Turk and stand up next to a Korean and have the Koreans start speaking Korean and have the Turks start speaking Turkish. It is crazy cool. It is very, very super cool. You should totally do this experiment. You can. They exist here in Austin. Just start looking for them. The Turks are starting to move into the Middle East for multiple reasons, one of them being they're serving as mercenaries. Another one is they're just looking for land to inhabit. It's a migration. There are immigrants coming in. And by 1037, they're politically in a position where they start conquering. And they end up conquering a huge chunk of the Asian part that the Arab empire had. I'm making this number up because I never measured it. But they probably ended up with about 30% of the Arab empire, maybe a little bit more. Maybe a third of the Arab empire. Let me introduce another actor, the Roman Empire. So I've said this before in lectures. So people who have seen my previous lectures will probably be annoyed with me because I'm just repeating myself. But I have to a little bit because I'm going to assume that you haven't. And that way it makes sense. When I was a kid, when I was an adult, I was taught that the Roman Empire fell on September 4, 476 AD. This is one of my big pet peeves about the way we teach history. The Roman Empire did not fall on September 4, 476 AD. That's just a lie. There's nothing even remotely truthful about it. What happened on September 4 is Romulus Augustus, the Western Roman emperor, took off his purple robes, stuck it in a box with a note attached to the box that said, we don't need two emperors anymore. We just need one emperor. And he sent it to Emperor Zeno. Emperor Romulus Augustus was in Ravenna, Italy. That was the capital of the Western Roman Empire at that time. They had long since abandoned Rome. The city of Rome existed. It was largely empty, though. It had 1 and 1 half million people at its height. And at that point, there were 40,000 people. Can you imagine walking through the streets of a city that at one point had 1 and 1 half million people and there's only 40,000 people there? Talk about ghost town. What was that like?

And of course, most of those houses and buildings have collapsed, and they're in ruins. But still, that must have just been a trip. We were great ones. What happened to us? This is terrible. And then you look at the coins, and they were striking at the time. And you're like, dude, what happened to your artists? They all died, too? Find some artists. So what happened was the Roman Empire fell on May 29, 1453. So when you were a kid, probably this happened. It happened to me. People would go, we don't know why the Roman Empire fell. Maybe it was the gladiators. They stopped doing the gladiating like centuries earlier. So probably not. Maybe it was the orgies and the eating festivals. They also stopped doing some of that, too. I mean, they still had a little bit of that going. But not as much as they did during the Republic. That was the height of that. You know what I mean? That was the good old days. So that's probably not it. Lead pipes. If lead pipes was a problem, we're in trouble. I don't know if you know this, but we have lead pipes in the United States. All the urban centers have lead pipes, as Flint found out. So probably not the lead pipes, either. For the record, what happens is hard water calcifies the inside of the lead pipes, and then the lead is no longer a problem because there's basically a salt layer inside the pipe protecting you from the lead. But then your city council decides they don't have enough money. Why? Because we went through a tax-cutting frenzy because somebody went, taxes are evil. They pay for things like water. What do you mean taxes are evil? Roads. Where do you think roads come from? Schools. Schools are also taxes. Hospitals, scientific research, police departments, fire departments. It's not the Libertarian Ferry that delivers that stuff. That's taxes. Unless you're lucky and you had a bunch of oil, like Texas does. Anyway, but it's OK. We keep our electric grid functioning just as well as Egypt does. So that's amazing. It's fun living in a third world country again. You know what I mean? It's very familiar. I go to Mexico in the summer so I have electricity. Also, by the way, it's cooler. Push that through your brain. I still can't get over that. I'm very confused about that. So I've derailed myself. Why did I go down that path? So here's what happened. I was taught we don't know why the Romans collapsed. But we do know why the Romans collapsed. And the reason we know why the Romans collapsed is because I can actually tell you the exact day the Romans collapsed. I don't know what it's telling me. Actually, it's telling me you need to go. The Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453. The reason why the Romans collapsed on May 20, you thought I was kidding, the reason why the Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453, and I can tell you exactly why, is because an Ottoman army captured the last Roman capital, Constantinople. Constantinople was the last piece of Roman real estate. In other words, there's no mystery why the Romans fell apart, the Roman Empire fell apart. It fell apart because it was conquered. And we know the exact moment it was conquered. In other words, there's no reason to have doubt about the date that the Roman Empire fell. Here's what happened. There was a guy named Hieronymus Wulf. About a hundred years after the Roman Empire fell, and I want to say a hundred years, but that's probably wrong, somewhere around 1550, right? The Roman Empire fell 1453. He decided he was going to rewrite history on purpose and tell a really big lie on purpose. He had two goals. One, he wanted to divorce the Roman Empire from its ignominious defeat at the hands of the Muslims. The Roman Empire was a Christian empire. He was a Christian. He was a German. And he hated the idea that Muslims had conquered the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire had been defeated by Ottoman Turks. And so he decided he was going to move the date of the conquest of the Roman Empire to a hundred years earlier, lie to everybody, and people would accept the lie because it would divorce the end of the Roman Empire from the Muslims.

And then the second goal was, in 476, Odo Vakur, the German, declared himself the king of Italy. Now, to be clear, he left Italy in the Roman Empire. He didn't separate Italy from the Roman Empire. So Italy just became, instead of a set of provinces, it became one kingdom with Odo Vakur, the ruler, who sent taxes to Emperor Zeno and flew a Roman flag. It's weird, but it also means Italy is still in the Roman Empire. But because Odo Vakur was a German, then Hieronymus Wolf could say, the Germans took out the Roman Empire. But it's not true. It's a lie. It's a bald-faced lie. So by the time we get to the Crusades, there's a Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire is playing a major role. And the reason the Roman Empire is playing a major role is it's been in decline for a long time. When I say the Roman Empire fell in 1453, you have to remember that's after 2,200 years. The Romans aren't quite as long as the Egyptians in terms of the length of their history, right? When the Romans conquered Egypt in 31 BC, Egypt was a 4,500-year-old civilization, right? It's not quite on that scale, but it's really close. It's half that scale. And Rome had been in decline since the 200s. In other words, Rome had been on its way out for 13 centuries. So for more than half of the length of time that Rome had been around, it was struggling to survive. That's what you call tenacity, resilience. That's incredible. Who survives barely making it for that long? At one point, they actually do get conquered. And they manage to put themselves back together and reconstitute themselves and just keep going. They break up on multiple occasions. Zenobia is my favorite. There was a woman who led a rebellion in Syria, and she captured Syria, Turkey, Palestine, and Egypt, and she made her own little empire. They were too sexist to let a woman rule, so she made her six-year-old son the actual emperor. But she ruled, and his name was Wabalathus. Wabalathus. Isn't that a cool name? Anyway, and by the way, Palmyra was her capital. So sort of a strange twist, right? She was like in the middle of Syria, made her capital there. Don't worry, the Romans killed her. Something like that's not going to be allowed. And they put the empire back together, and then it fell apart. It was like an accordion. The Arabs come, tear them up. The Germans tear them up. It's a mess. The Huns tear them up. The Bulgarians tear them up. It's just wave after wave until they finally just go down once and for all in 1453. But by the time the story of the Crusades is happening, the Romans are desperately trying to hold on to what is today Turkey. I'm going to use Anatolia just because I think it makes it a little bit less confusing, at least in my brain. Anatolia was the name at the time. Turkey is the name today because it's the Turks' habit, right? They've named it after themselves. Another actor I want to introduce might sound strange. It's the Vikings. I'm going to tell you something really strange. The Vikings are one of the reasons why the Crusades happened. Isn't that weird? You're like, wait, why? Work with me here on this one because it's kind of strange. So the Vikings were Germans. They were the Germans who settled Scandinavia. Scandinavia was kind of like the worst piece of real estate in Europe at the time. Today, obviously, it's like heaven. But back then, it was the garbage piece that nobody wanted to go to. In other words, the people who became the Vikings, they never called themselves Viking. Viking is a term we've retroactively put on top of them, like the term Byzantine that Hieronymus Wolf came up with for the Roman Empire's last 1,000 years, 977 years for those of you who want it to be more precise. There's no such thing as a Byzantine Empire. The Vikings, I'm going to use the term Viking anyway, though. The Vikings got stuck with this piece of real estate where you really couldn't grow a crop. So pretty much all you could do was raise cattle and go fishing. And at some point, their population had reached a threshold.

They had sort of reached the carrying capacity of cheese rolls and dried fish. And when that happened, they had no choice but to start looking for alternatives. And they took two approaches, by the way. One approach the Vikings did was they set out to start trading. They thought, you know what? We can fix our problem if we can do trade, because we'll have the money to buy the food that we need. And the Eastern Vikings, the Swedes, got so into this, they actually started trying to figure out where they could go to. And they started reading their sagas. This is the 8th century. Not reading their sagas. They were oral histories. They were listening to their sagas. And the sagas told the Vikings that the place the Germans were from was Iran. By the way, Kermani-Iran, which is where we get the word German, because ga and ka, when languages change over time, are interchangeable. So Kerman, German. We say German because we pronounce it like a French person would. But a German says German, right? So if you're saying the study of Germanic studies, it's Germanismus, because they don't say it the way a French person would. So the sagas tell the Vikings you're originally from Persia. So the Swedes go, wow, that's an idea. Let's go. Let's see what we can find. And so what they would do is they would go to what is today Latvia. They would take their long ships up the Dvina River. They'd go as far inland as you could get, pretty close to the city of Rzhev. They would pull their ships out of the water, fully loaded, because they have to carry their supplies. They can't leave the supplies behind. So they would carry these fully loaded ships over land until they got to the Volga River. I mean, that's a pretty manly, you know what I mean? Like, they've got their armor and their weapons. And they're hauling these. I want to go backwards in time just to see this. You know there was a lot of grunting. And then they put the ship in the Volga River. And they sailed the Volga River all the way to the Caspian Sea. And they went down the Caspian Sea to the Persian coast. And they're like, hi. And the Arabs had just conquered Persia a couple of centuries earlier. And they're walking around Persia going, what is all this? You have modern agriculture and modern medicine. And you're doing philosophy. And you've invented zero. And you're doing algebra. And the Vikings are like, we don't even have a written language. We shouldn't have left. We could have had this. And they began trading. Now, to supplement their trading on that long trade route, they would also raid. And they would attack the Slavic populations along the way. And they would take some for slaves. And then they would sell them into the slave markets, make a little bit of extra koi. So maybe that. Full disclosure, I'm a quarter Swedish. So if there's a little bit too much admiration on my part, it's just ugly nationalism. The Western Vikings started raiding England. And then they started expanding where they raided. And before you knew it, they were just raiding all of northern and Western Europe. And in the process, they start to get some amazing victories. So you know, London Bridge is falling down, falling down. That's because it did. That's because my ancestors took out London Bridge. That song is based on a real event. Isn't that cool? I think it is. And so the Vikings actually end up conquering places like England. They get multiple kings of England. Cnut the Great, of course, the most famous. But there's also Svein Forkbeard. Isn't that a cool name? Svein Forkbeard. And they end up ruling this empire that stretches across Scandinavia and England. And they were doing all right for themselves. And they got their eyes on Paris. And they thought, you know what? Let's go take France. I don't know why not. We've got Latvia and Estonia and Finland and Ukraine, right? Because the Vikings, eventually the Ukrainian nobles couldn't figure out how to rule their lands. So they started hiring Viking mercenaries.

The group of Viking mercenaries they hired were the Rus, R-U-S. And the Rus eventually created Kievan Rus because they realized they were the only armed guys. And they didn't know why they were taking orders from anybody. And they just took over. And that's how Russia was founded. Isn't that crazy? Anyway, they almost got Paris. Long story short, they were on the island. They were battering down doors. They were scaling the walls. They almost got Paris. It was so close. And so after they failed to get Paris, the French came out. And they went, OK, that was too close. You almost got us. If you get a second shot, we don't think we're making it. So what do we do? We're not surrendering, surrendering. We're not giving you Paris. We're going to make you fight for it if you try to get it again. But we really don't want you to try again. We're going to meet you somewhere. And they make a deal with a guy named Rollo. And the deal is Northern France. They give Rollo Northern France. Now the Vikings, I told you, weren't called Vikings. They were called the Northmen, or depending on your language, Norsemen, or Nordmen, or Normans. And so the Vikings named Northern France after themselves. They called it Normandy. And they began ruling it. But they had a problem. And that was that the French peasants wouldn't learn German. They wouldn't learn to speak the dialects of German that the Vikings were speaking. They kept insisting on speaking French. And so the Norman nobility, Rollo, by the way, got Normandy in 911. The Norman nobility now has to learn French so that when they're abusing their peasants, the peasants understand the abuse. It doesn't help to shout at a peasant and then they don't understand you. You need them to understand. So they learn French. And what that does then is it sets us up for a really strange set of events. Somebody gets a great idea just a few decades later, 999, so 911 to 999, so 88 years later, to hire Norman mercenaries in southern Italy. And so Norman mercenaries start to travel from Northern France all the way to southern Italy. And they're being used by everybody. They're being used by the Romans, who are trying to hold on to southern Italy. They had it. They're losing it. They're trying to get it back. The Roman emperor at the time is a guy named Basil II. You want to laugh, but he was one of the greatest Roman emperors of the time period. And he went on a conquering spree and he starts carving up territory that the Romans had lost and he's putting it back in, including taking lands, Muslim lands. He actually brings the Roman Empire back to Syria and he captures Antioch and the northern end of Syria. The part of Syria that today is in Turkey is basically what he recaptured. So when the Ottoman Empire broke up, the Europeans showed up with a crayon and a napkin and they just began drawing borders. And you look at the border between Saudi Arabia and Jordan or Jordan and Iraq and you're like, why'd you do that? And they sneezed or something. Somebody got bumped and an extra wiggle line popped up. And they did that with Syria. They just chopped off the northern part and gave it to Turkey. So Basel II is re-carving the Roman Empire, but at the same time, there's all these forces pushing back and everybody's using Normans as mercenaries. That must have been awkward. You see your cousin on the other side. How much are you getting paid? And you fight for a little while. I'll pretend to kill you, OK? Don't swing at me. What eventually happens is those Normans go, why are we fighting for these other guys? And in 1030, the first Norman gets made a lord in southern Italy. And he slowly starts to conquer. And subsequent generations of Normans start to take pieces of southern Italy. And in 1061, the Normans are getting on ships and they're crossing over to Sicily. And they begin conquering Sicily. Sicily had been conquered by the Arabs two centuries earlier. The Normans also start getting hired by the Roman Empire in Anatolia, because they're being used to fight the Seljuks, who are coming west and fighting their way into Anatolia.

And so the Romans are using these Norman mercenaries in, I showed you the coin of Romanus IV. In 1071, Romanus IV has an army at a place called Manzikert. And they fight a battle against the Seljuks. And they're defeated. The Romans are defeated. The Normans take off after they were defeated. They just move out of the way. But the Romans get captured, including Romanus IV. He was taken. The Seljuks offered a ransom. The Romans are like, no, we don't ransom you. And they replaced him. The reason that mattered was the Norman commander, Russel de Baerl, decides he's going to do in Anatolia, in the middle of Turkey, by the way, Galatia. So right in the New Testament, Galatians, those are the letters that Paul writes to the Celts living in Anatolia. He decides he's going to carve out a little kingdom for himself in Galatia. And the Normans go on a conquering spree. And they make Ankara, Ankara, the capital of a Norman kingdom in the middle of Turkey. There are French-speaking Vikings ruling the middle of Turkey, which is historically populated by Celts. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. Historically populated by Celts, you know, kilt-wearing, bagpipe-playing Celts, because everything is actually intermingled and there's no boundaries. And the next thing you know, the Roman emperor is actually turning to the Seljuks and going, dude, can you help us with this guy? And the Seljuks, the ruler, the sultan, the sultanate of Rome, that's what they call themselves. Their flag was a two-headed eagle. The Roman flag was a two-headed eagle. Because when Emperor Romulus Augustus takes off his purple robes and sends it to Emperor Zeno, they've now unified the west and the east. They only have one emperor. So their new symbol for the Roman Empire is an eagle with two heads, one facing left, one facing right. Well, the Seljuks in Anatolia take that as their flag because their goal isn't to destroy the Roman Empire. It's to make a Muslim Roman Empire. Their goal is to eventually capture Constantinople one day. They don't hate the Roman Empire. They admire the Roman Empire. They want to be the Roman Empire. And so Suleiman I, the Seljuk sultanate of Rome, gets a request from the emperor, the Roman emperor, to go put down this Norman uprising. And he's baffled out of his mind. But yeah, sure, I'll help you. And in 1077, that Norman little kingdom vanishes. In 1084, the pope asks for an army to attack Spain. Spain was, at that time, majority-controlled by Muslims. The furthest north city that the Muslims owned in 1084 was a city called Barbastro. And so the pope asks for a Christian army to go to Barbastro and take it. One quarter of that army was a group of Normans. When they capture the city at first, they're pillaging it. They're slaughtering people. But the Normans decide they like the place and they stay. And the majority of the population is still Arab and it's still Muslim. And the Normans who stay start dressing like the Arabs. And they learn Arabic. And they're really digging Arab society. And they go Injun. And they go native. And it shocks everybody because it's like, wait, these French-speaking, blue-eyed, blonde Vikings are in Spain learning Muslim culture. And in a way, when you think about it, all three of these events that I just described are like little precursor crusades. In 1095, the pope holds two conventions. Both of them were in November. And Alexius Comnenus, Alexius I, the Roman Empire, comes to Italy. And this isn't a small thing because Italy isn't Roman. In fact, the pope in Rome and the Roman Empire have had a falling out that has lasted centuries. And they hate each other's guts a lot, not a little bit, a lot. So what happened was, as the Roman Empire was disintegrating, they managed to hold onto pieces of Italy, including the city of Rome. But the pope in Rome didn't like that because the original church had five patriarchs.

So the Orthodox Catholic Church. Orthodox is truth. Catholic is universal. So the Universal Truth Church, that was the original name of the Christian church. It had already had a schism. The Copts in Egypt had broken away in 284. But in the 700s, the church was still unified. But the pope in Rome came to resent the circumstances because the five patriarchs were the pope in Rome, the pope in Alexandria, the patriarch of Antioch, and the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Jerusalem. In other words, the original Christian church had five heads, two popes, two patriarchs, and an archbishop. By the way, pope came from the pope would have his child on his knee. And then people would come to kiss his ring. And they would hear the child saying, papa, papa. And it just stuck. Do you want me to say that again? The pope would have his child on his knee. You know, his kid. His kid, because the original Catholic Church didn't have a celibacy thing. They did the celibacy thing later so that they could make sure that the clergy didn't pass churches and church property down in their wills and illegitimate children in Europe couldn't inherit. So that's how that, that's why that happened. It wasn't to stop the popes from having babies. It was to stop the popes from having legitimate babies. It wasn't to stop the clergy from having families. It's just to stop the clergy from having legitimate families so they couldn't pass on church land. So anyway, in 756, the pope in Rome is sick of the fact that he's kind of second fiddle. He wants to be first fiddle. After all, it's Rome. It's Roman Empire. So he goes and he makes a deal with the Franks. And they break Rome out of the Roman Empire. It's Pope Stephen II who does this in 756. 763, Naples was still in the Roman Empire. Duke Stephen II, two different guys, same name, makes it easy to remember. 763, Naples breaks out of the Roman Empire and joins the pope in creating this papal state thing. Naples is never part of the papal states, but the idea that it's now going to be a separate thing from the Roman Empire, it breaks away. And the animosity between Rome and Constantinople just keeps growing and growing and growing until 1058. In 1058, they get into a spat that's so bitter and so nasty, they start to excommunicate each other. The patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates the pope. The pope excommunicates the patriarch. Next thing you know, they're interdicting. Interdicting is when you excommunicate whole cities, whole countries, whole regions, whole provinces. They start interdicting each other. And before they're done, Western Europe has completely interdicted Eastern Europe. And Eastern Europe has completely interdicted Western Europe. And the East took the truth, and the West took the universe. And that's why there's a Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, and a Greek Orthodox church. So when Alexios Komnenos goes to Italy in 1095, it's 37 years after they had just done this to each other. So the wounds are raw. They're fresh. And the reason Alexios Komnenos is there is he says, we're not making it. The sultanate of Rome has just taken almost all of Anatolia. We maybe have 10% of it left. We're finished to the east, which means all we have is a little piece of Southeastern Europe. We need your help. And Pope Urban II goes, you know what we should do? We shouldn't just help you a little bit. We should go all out. Let's retake the Holy Land and put it back in the Roman Empire. And Alexios Komnenos goes, yeah, why not? Let's do it. Let's make this happen. And so Pope Urban II comes out of those two talks, meeting with these top officials, including the Roman emperor, and says, I want an army to go to Jerusalem. We're going to conquer all of that and put it back in the Roman Empire. Let's go. 1096, a guy named Peter the Hermit gets up in front of everybody and says, we heard the pope loud and clear. Let's do this. And he puts together what's called the People's Crusade. It's basically just a bunch of peasants, some knights.

It's not the mercenary soldiers. It's not the knight. It's not all knights, right? It's just some peasants. They turn into a mob. And the first thing they do to sanctify the Crusades, this holy religious war, is they attack the Jews living in Germany. And the estimate is they murder about 2,000 Jews, and then they rape like 7,000 more Jews. And then they leave Germany on their way to the Holy Land to... I missed something. I feel like they read a piece of the New Testament that I... Did I? Where does it say that? Before thou goest on the crusade, holiest of holy, do what Jesus would have you do, slaughter Jews in Germany. Did I? And that is the first pogrom. That is the first documented case where Europeans, specifically post-Roman Empire, the Roman Empire hated Jews. Just like it was a hobby for them. They mostly did it in Palestine, right? It was just, ah, the Jews again. They keep throwing rocks at us. That's going to be ironic in a few centuries. So that's the first pogrom. 1096. That army works its way all the way to Constantinople. When it gets to Constantinople, Alexios Komnenos, they've been raiding the whole way because they need to feed themselves. So they're sacking villages. They're tearing into people's food stores. It's a disaster. It's a raiding mob. It shows up at Constantinople. Alexios Komnenos is like, I got to get rid of these guys as fast as I can. He goes, you know what you got to do? You got to cross the Bosporus. Here's my fleet. He puts them on a ship and he sends them across the Bosporus and they set up a camp. They actually attack a town. They capture it. And he's like, I'll send you food. You just stay on your side of the Bosporus. This is going to work out great. In the meantime, he's actually calling the Turks on the phone. Hey, there's some crazy dudes. I just deposited them on your end. Good luck with that. The guy who's now the son of Suleiman I, his name is Khalid Arslan. He decides he's got to get rid of these guys. And they want to take Nicaea. So Nicaea is pronounced Nicaea. I'm going to not say Nicaea again for the rest of the lecture. It drives me nuts. It's like Julius Caesar is Gaius Julius Caesar. Stop saying Julius Caesar. I feel like it could be a salad dressing or something. You know what I mean? It doesn't have to be the name of that guy. Nicaea was the capital for the Sultanate of Rome. So they actually put it almost across from Constantinople. And the reason is because that's their goal. It's Constantinople. They're nowhere near capturing it. They know that. But that's still, you know, it's nice to have a goal, even if it's a far off one. And so they've got Nicaea. It's like poison. And the mob, the peasant mob, the People's Crusade, as it's called, thinks it's going to capture Nicaea. And Clege Arslan basically sets up an ambush for them and slaughters them. And that's the end of the People's Crusade, for the most part. By the way, some of the leadership got away. Because, of course, that's how that usually works out. In any case, the real Crusader army doesn't show up until the next year. The real Crusader army is a mixture of nobles from across France and Germany, primarily, but also Italy, because there's Normans coming. So for our purposes, there's a bunch of Crusaders. There's too many. There's too many names. So I'm just going to simplify it a little bit. The Crusaders you need to know about are Bohemond of Toronto, not Canada, but Italy, and then his nephew, Tancred, and Godfrey de Bouillon, and Baldwin de Bologna. Baldwin and Godfrey are both from northern France. They weren't actually Normans, but they had definitely sided with the Normans. Their father, Eustace II, in fact, was with William the Conqueror in 1066 when the Normans decided to also conquer England. The Normans were very busy people. Oh, let's go to Spain. You know what? I southern it. Anatolia. England. In other words, long after the Vikings started speaking French, they're still tearing up the planet. They're on this permanent, multi-century rampage.

And it wasn't enough for them that they had captured England already twice. They wanted it a third time. They're like, this is good real estate. We want it back. And they got it. And so when Godfrey and Baldwin go on this crusade, they're not actually Normans, but they're part of the Norman sphere. So in a way, the top four of the five most important Crusaders are Normans. The fifth guy is a guy named Raimond. He's Raimond of Toulouse, also known as Raimond Saint-Gilles. He was Raimond the Fourth of Toulouse. And they show up. And Alexius, there's also Hugh de Vermandois. There's a few other guys. But I just want you to know those five. They show up at Constantinople. And they swear an oath of fealty. Well, not Tancred. He refuses. He wants nothing to do with this. And what they promise is that all the land they capture will be handed to Alexius Comnenus, the Roman emperor. And of course, they're lying through their teeth. They have no intention whatsoever of handing anything over. Their goal is to go in there, carve off land, and make their own little personal fiefdoms. They cross over the Bosporus with the Roman navy. It's 1097. Khalid Arslan isn't there to greet them. He's in southern Turkey fighting another Turk. And the reason is that Turk was trying to capture a city from an Armenian, Malatya. And Khalid Arslan was worried if Danishmen captured Malatya, it would put his position, it would weaken his position. So even though he's got this crusader threat on the west, he's so focused on his rivals that he's actually fighting them. He turns around when he realizes the crusaders have landed. He goes as fast as he can. By the time he gets there, Nicaea has already fallen. He convinces other Turks in the area to fight alongside him. They fight the crusaders at Doraleum. And they're defeated. And Khalid Arslan has to withdraw. And they just watch as the crusader army passes. The crusader army then goes through Armenia. So when the Roman Empire lost Anatolia, a piece of the Roman Empire broke away and didn't get captured by the Muslims and remained its own separate thing. It was oftentimes called Lesser Armenia. It was a little Armenian kingdom on what is today the southern coast of Turkey. And so the crusaders arrived there. Tancred was the kind of guy who would look at a situation and he would size it up real quick. He decides to basically conquer it. And he just goes and grabs all the strategic points in Lesser Armenia. And in the process, he's running into Baldwin. Baldwin has the same idea, but he's a little slower. So he keeps arriving after Tancred has done this. And the problem then is Baldwin has the bigger army. So he shows up and Tancred has a problem. Do I fight my fellow crusader, who's basically telling me he's taking my thing from me, or do I walk away? So the first time he walks away, the second time he fights. The crusaders have barely started the crusade and they're already fighting each other. Not many people die for the record. I want to say it was like two guys died and a few dozen are wounded. And then they call off the fight and they negotiate and they make a deal. But still, you can see there's already problems. They get over the mountains, the Tarsus Mountains, and they arrive at Antioch. Antioch is the first prize. So Antioch had only just been captured by the Muslims in 1084. So by the time that the crusaders have arrived, it's 1098. They set up a siege. But Baldwin decides, ah, not interested. And he takes off to the east and he goes to a city called Edessa and he puts Edessa under, he tries to capture Edessa. He doesn't put it under siege. He tries to capture Edessa. And Edessa was ruled by Armenians. And so Baldwin goes to the Armenians and he starts working out a deal with them. The leader of the Armenians in Edessa was a guy named Thoros. And Baldwin talks Thoros into adopting him and then letting him marry Thoros' daughter so that he will become now the heir to Edessa. And Thoros goes, okay. Well, Armenian culture was that when you, presumably, one of the chroniclers says this.

I'm not sure it's actually true. That's one of the problems you always have when you're reading historical accounts. You're always like, mm, did that really happen? According to the chronicler, Armenian culture was when you got adopted, your adoptive father and mother wore a really big gown and then you would take off your top, you'd have pants on, and then you would crawl under the gown, but they're completely naked under, and you hug them. Anyway, so apparently that's what Baldwin did with Thoros and his wife. And then he waited around for a while until a mob grabbed Thoros and his wife and hanged them. And that's the birth of the first crusader state. We now have the county of Edessa. Baldwin is the first crusader lord to rule a chunk of territory. I think it was May 1098. In the meantime, the siege in Antioch is still going on. Bohemond is the guy who wants Antioch for himself, but so does Raimond. So there's now two crusaders both pushing for it, but the problem is they still gotta capture it first. They haven't captured it. The guy who was the ruler of Antioch was a guy named Yarhisian. And Yarhisian starts putting out feelers to see if he can get help to break this, the crusader siege. And there's two guys nearby. There's the guy who's running Damascus, because even though they're part of the Seljuk Empire, the Seljuk Empire is already coming apart at the seams. The Seljuk warlords don't like each other. They don't cooperate. They see each other as rivals. They're constantly backstabbing each other. And the guy in charge of Damascus is a guy named Dukak. And Dukak's brother, Ridwan, is the guy in charge of Aleppo. They hate each other's guts. They see each other as rivals. So Yarhisian sends for help from Dukak. Dukak takes an army, and he has to go past Aleppo, right? And he's coming up past Aleppo. He gets to line of sight of the crusader army. He panics. He turns around, and he heads back to Damascus. So Yarhisian is like, oh, what do I do? I guess I have to talk to Ridwan. But he doesn't want anything to do with Ridwan, because Ridwan has a group of allies that he didn't like. The Hashishans. The Hashishans were Shia who decided they didn't like the direction Islam was going in. Sunnis were systematically winning. The Seljuks were Sunnis. And the Seljuks had replaced the Buyids, who were Shia, and had been defeating the Fatimids, not replace them. The Fatimids were also Shia. And so there is this guy, Hassan al-Sabah, who decides he wants to take a different approach to fight for the Shia cause. And that different approach is he's going to get into political intrigue, spying, and assassinating people. And Hashishan is where we get the word assassin from. Now, whether or not they used Hashish, we don't really know. That could have been the chroniclers trying to make a story up. In any case, Hassan al-Sabah's followers were total fanatics. And Ridwan, the ruler of Aleppo, was totally into them. And they were friends. And they were working together. And so this scares Hashishan. So he doesn't really want anything to do with this. He asks Ridwan to send an army. And Ridwan does pretty much the same thing Dukak does. And nothing comes of it. So Hashishan realizes he's running out of food. He's running out of time. But so are the crusaders. The crusaders are literally starving to death. They've been traveling for months. It's a year now. And they're running out of supplies. And they've been slaughtering their horses along the way. For food purposes, they're down to like 800 horses. And probably half the crusader army is already gone by this point. Some of them died. Some of them got sick. Some of them broke a leg. Some of them just were like, you know what? I don't need this. And they turned around and they headed home. So now, you can see on the inside, Antioch is desperate because he's trying to figure out how he's going to get through this. And the crusaders like Bohemond and Rahamund are trying to figure out how they're going to get in the walls.

And at that point, another guy jumps into the story. And the other guy is the ruler of Mosul, Karbuka. Karbuka, this Yahishan convinces Karbuka to come with an army. But Karbuka has to pass Edessa on the way. And he's looking at Edessa. And he goes, this Baldwin has it. I want it. And so he stops his army. For three weeks, he parks it outside of Edessa. And then he decides he can't take it. And so he abandons the siege. And he heads to Antioch. But by the time he gets to Antioch, his generals are working against him. And so there's all this intrigue going on before he even gets to Antioch. But even though he's still heading to Antioch, it's kind of too late. Because in the meantime, because he took so long, because he added those three weeks, there was a guy named Firuz. Firuz was accused of dealing on the black market even though he knew and was a friend of Yahishan. And so he gets charged a heavy fine. He's so furious about this that he decides to betray his own people. Firuz tells the crusaders, I'm going to let you in to the city. The crusaders are like, why would we believe you? This is probably a trap. He goes, I'm going to give you my son. If it's a trap, kill my son. Crusaders are like, really? OK. Why are you doing this? He goes, I want land, gold, and vengeance. They go, OK. We can give you all three of those. And so in the night, he had access to a window that looked out over the walls. And he just dropped a really long rope down. And the crusaders came up the rope one at a time till there were about 500 guys inside the city. And they began fighting for the gate. Yahishan hears the sound. He panics. He jumps on a horse. And he rides off. He leaves his son and wife and family behind. He just takes off. He doesn't even assess the situation. He just figures, it's over. I'm out of here. He rides for days. He finally collapses from riding. His entourage try to put him back on the horse. They can't get him back on the horse. He's having a depression bout or something. He just lays on the side of the road. A peasant walks by, recognizes who he is, and cuts his head off and takes it to the crusaders and gets a reward. In the meantime, Yahishan's son, Shams al-Daula, son of the state, sun as in the thing in the sky, not child. Shams al-Daula, isn't that a cool name? Who would name their kid that? Anyway, Shams is beautiful, but of the state? Anyway, he's got the citadel, and he's holding on to it. He's like, OK, they've got the city. But he's also watching what the crusaders are doing in the city. They're not kind conquerors. They're not walking through and going, oh, hi, everybody. How's it going? They are murdering everybody. They're just going through the streets, slaughtering the inhabitants of Antioch. They're killing the men. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the poor. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the women. They're killing the babies. They're leaving nobody. And Shams is up there in the citadel going, what? Who are these people? Why are they doing this? Why wouldn't you want the city intact, somebody to tax, somebody to work for you? Why are you slaughtering the city? And there's nothing you can do about it except resist and hold on to the citadel. That's when Karbuka's army shows up. Too late. Shams actually sneaks out of the city to go meet with him to try and coordinate what's going to happen next. How are they going to fight for the city? Because he hasn't given up. Karbuka fires him on the spot. He goes, you're done. You're not going back to the citadel. He then sets up his army to fight. But the princes who are with him fear, Dukak and Ridwan, that if he succeeds, he will then be able to establish authority over Aleppo and Damascus. And so they actually pull off the field and start heading home. And when the rest of his army sees this, they lose heart. The crusaders see what's happening. They see them pulling away. So they come running out of the gate because the crusaders had just found the lance that speared Jesus.

The Romans check to see if he's dead by spearing him. Because if fluid comes out, it means he's drowned in his own fluids. Because that's the goal of crucifixion, is to drown you slowly. And they found the lance that did this. It's not probably, right? Probably what happened was a monk took a lance and buried it and said, I'm pretty sure it's somewhere around here. You guys should dig for it. They dig. They find it. They're like, it's a miracle. And they come charging out of the city towards Kabuka's army. His army's morale has collapsed. His morale has collapsed. They just turn and run away. And the crusaders don't pursue them because they think it must be a trap because they can't figure out why the larger army just ran away for no reason. And then they have their city. There's a brief struggle between Raimond and Bohemond. Bohemond wins. And Bohemond gets to keep Antioch. And then the rest of the crusaders go, we're not here for Antioch. We're here for Jerusalem. Let's keep going. Bohemond goes, I'm good. I got what I wanted. I just wanted one of the richest cities on the planet. Although it's not rich anymore because you just killed its inhabitants. Anyway, I don't understand. They start marching to Jerusalem. The next city they come upon is a town called Ma'ara. When they arrive at Ma'ara, the population fights as hard as they can. So it's soldiers and citizens holding onto the city as hard as they can. But eventually the crusaders get in and they capture the city. When they do, the crusaders murder all 20,000 inhabitants and eat them. So there's multiple sources that say this on both sides. It's always good to have both sides saying it. I know of three sources that are from the crusader side that say they ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. And they describe it in slightly different ways, but it's mostly the same. One of them says that they spit at the adults and the children and just roasted them over a fire. Another one says that they would cut chunks of flesh off of them and then roast the individual pieces over a fire. But it's pretty widespread agreement that the crusaders ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. But there's a lesson in this story that applies to today. So one of the things people will do who want to defend an indefensible position is they'll find something to nitpick. So one of the crusaders says that the people were tortured first, one of the crusader chronicles. But none of the Muslim chronicles say that the people were tortured first. And so what I've seen happen, even on BBC, is somebody will say, well, they may have eaten the people, but they didn't torture them. So first of all, I think if you slaughter 20,000 people, including the children in front of the parents, that's torture. But then second, I kind of don't care if that crusader's chronicles said there was torture and there wasn't or not, because I still think there was a horrible crime committed here. Why are you focusing on that one thing? So no Muslims are saying there was torture. Only one crusader was saying there was torture. Nobody's having an argument with you, dude. There's no, sure, there's no torture. They just killed them and ate them. The reason I'm bringing this up is you see this kind of nitpicking. Like, for example, with the Holocaust, Holocaust deniers, I have seen, focus on the number. So for the record, it wasn't 6 million Jews. It was probably 5.1 to 5.4. 6 million is a slight exaggeration. It's not a big exaggeration, but it's a slight exaggeration. So the Holocaust deniers would focus on the number. Well, it wasn't 6 million. If you just take the 5.1, you took away their ability to do this. And now you can, well, how about the 5.1? And then there's nowhere they can go, because that's the number. The 5.4 is also a number, possibly. But just go with the low. 5.1 is already a horrific, nightmarish, hellish, evil. It doesn't have to be 6. You see what I'm saying? It doesn't have to have been torture. We're good with it just being cannibalism.

So be careful when you're arguing, when you're dealing with people. What is that called? I feel like it's distraction. It's not gaslighting. It's a little different thing. It's like, yeah, but what about? Anyway, the Crusaders then approached Tarabulus, Tripoli. It was one of the wealthiest cities on the planet at the time. So was Antioch, by the way, but not anymore. Tarabulus had a library in it with 100,000 books. It was ruled by a qadi, as opposed to a guy who took the title of maybe king or something. It was ruled by a guy who had the title, basically, judge, which is kind of cool. And the city was rich. It had these big walls around it. The Crusaders set up a siege. There was no point. There was no way they were getting in. So they bypass it. And then they decide, you know what? Let's just keep bypassing. We have Antioch. We have Edessa. We have Ma'ara. Let's just go straight to Jerusalem. Why are we capturing anything else? So they bypass Beirut. They bypass Arsuf, Acre. They just don't deal with any of it. Sur, Fayda, they go straight to Jerusalem. When they get there, they immediately attack it. They don't have any ladders. They don't have any siege equipment. This city has a wall on it. It has a citadel. So the Crusaders just go like a mob, charging up to the thing. And they're like banging on. And the defenders are pouring oil on them, shooting them with arrows, going, they can't get in here. Why are they doing this? And hundreds of them are wounded and killed for no effect. So then the Crusaders set up a siege. The problem is that Jerusalem is brilliantly designed to not be siegeable. So all the sprigs are inside the wall. So the area around it is arid. So the army stuck trying to besiege this thing basically has to run a water line to the Jordan River and by bucket bring the water to the army. That's a tough thing to do. But that's what they're going to do. And they're praying. They're hoping that God will intercede and give them a break. And it may not have been God, but it was the Genovese. The Genovese show up with some English volunteers by ship. And the Genovese brought the material needed to build siege equipment. They build the siege equipment, and they attack the city. So a little bit of, I'm going to bring in another actor, another player. So Egypt had been taken over by the Fatimids. The Fatimids were Shia who had started in North Africa. They took over Egypt. By the way, they found Cairo, 969. Cairo is just barely over 1,000 years old. It's such a baby for the Middle East, right? Middle Easters go, oh, you're 1,000? Oh, you're so young. You're so young. Your whole life is ahead of you. Of course, Cairo is a mega massive city. It's the sixth largest metropolitan area on the planet. There's only three metropolitan areas on the planet that aren't in Asia that are in the top 10. Cairo, Sao Paulo in Brazil, and Mexico City are the three that aren't in Asia. Everything else is Shanghai and Tokyo and Calcutta. You know what I mean? So the Fatimids are doing all right, but something really weird is happening. The Fatimids hated the Seljuks, but the Fatimids liked the Romans. They were allies. So when this whole crusade thing happened, in the mind of the Fatimids, who had just lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks a few years earlier, what's going to happen is the crusaders, who are technically in the service of the Roman Empire, are going to split that land. Syria will go to the Romans. Palestine will go to Egypt. That's what they're thinking is going to happen. So they decide, let's go grab Jerusalem from the Seljuks before the crusaders arrive to do our part in this alliance. They have an explicit alliance with Rome. This isn't like they're speculating. This is the deal that they've made with Alexios Komnenos. And so they send an army. They defeat the Seljuks. They capture Jerusalem. And then they send an envoy to meet with the crusaders. And the crusaders just keep coming. And the Egyptians are like, what are you doing?

No, no, you stay on that side. That's the deal. We're going to split this. And the crusaders just keep coming. And it becomes clear to the Fatimids, they're going to fight. They're allies. So they dig in. And that's when the siege equipment comes and the crusaders break in. And the Egyptian general in command of the defense of Jerusalem, Iftikhar, is looking at this going, how do I fight this now that the crusaders have a sectional wall? And so he retreats his men to the citadel. Once they're in the citadel, there's nothing he can do for the population of Jerusalem. All he can do is he can hold on. It's basically a thorn in their side. He's going to make it so that the crusaders can't control Jerusalem, but they can control parts of Jerusalem. And he won't control any of the merchant part of Jerusalem, the commerce part of Jerusalem. He'll just have a military piece. And eventually, he'll run out of supplies. And their goal is to fight to the death. There's no point. They saw what happened at Ma'ara, and they saw what happened at Antioch. They know who the crusaders are. They're supposed to be allies. They're being backstabbed. They get it. But the crusaders really want the city. And so they start negotiating. And the deal that they come up with, Raymond Saint-Gilles comes up with, is the following, that the Egyptians will leave in groups of five. They'll leave the citadel, and then they'll exit the city five at a time. That way, if the crusaders break their word, turn on them, they'll only kill those five dudes who are in the middle of leaving. And then the guys that are still in the citadel, they can just keep fighting. And anybody who escaped has already escaped. And that's the deal. So the first five go, and then another five, and another five. And you know the last five were like, oh, god, you know they're going to turn on us. But they don't. And the last five get away. And then the crusaders go over to the gate, and they close it. They go over to the Muslim quarter, and they just begin murdering everybody. They're just walking through the city, slaughtering person after person. Tancred, the guy that I talked about, with the strategic mind who kept running into trouble with Baldwin until Baldwin took Edessa, he can't take it. He's like, what are we doing? He runs over to a group of Muslims who were running. And he's like, whoa, whoa, I'm not going to kill you. He hands them his banner. And he says, if crusaders approach you, say you're with Tancred. And show them my banner, and they won't harm you. And they're, of course, grateful. And then he just sort of runs around the city trying to figure out what to loot and how to save people's lives. He hasn't given up the looting. Don't be naive about this. But he's also like, let's not just murder everybody. And he describes in his own memoir, later on coming upon that group of Muslims laying there dead on his bloody banner. The crusaders didn't even care. They're just like, you're with Tancred? A group of Muslims realize there's no surviving this. This is over. So they decide, let's go to the mosque. Let's die praying. And so they barricade themselves inside the mosques. The crusaders eventually smash the doors open. They slaughter everybody inside. They get buckets of water. They wash the blood out. They go to the top of the minaret. They break the crescent moon off, and they stick a cross on top. They say a prayer. Boom. Insta-church. Then they go to the Jewish quarter. Because see, Jerusalem was in four quarters. A Muslim quarter, two Christian quarters, and a Jewish quarter. Why are the crusaders here? So that Christians can own Jerusalem. Because clearly they could be there if they had half the city. Not interesting. So they go to the Jewish quarter. And the Jews know what's coming. It's not rocket science here. So they just start running to synagogues. They figure, you know, let's do like those Muslims did. We'll die in prayer. The crusaders believed that Jews were so horrible, so evil, you couldn't wash out the synagogue afterwards and turn it into a church.

So they just piled wood around the synagogues and burned them to the ground, burning the Jews inside alive. And then they go to the two Christian quarters. And of course, at this point, the Christian population is peeing itself. Because it's just watched half the city get exterminated. And they go, you have the true cross, where is it? And the Christians go, we're not telling you. You're savages. And the crusaders go, OK, we got you. And they start murdering the Christian clergy. They're like, who's a priest? Let's have your priest. And they just start slaughtering the priests. They're like, when we're done, we're going to do the deacons. And then we're going to start working on your families. Eventually, somebody tells them, here's the true cross. Please stop killing us. And they stop massacring the Christians as well. But then they turn to the Christians and go, remember that great schism in 1058? These Catholic priests are your new priests. Get used to it. We're not doing that anymore. Your orthodox ways are out. And they're like, yeah, whatever. And that's how the crusaders captured Jerusalem. Isn't that a heartwarming story? Is that too much sarcasm? At that point, the Egyptians are trying to figure out what to do. They send an army to Ascalon with the hope that they'll eventually be able to come back and fight to capture Jerusalem back. Godfrey is named the new ruler of Jerusalem. He does not take the title king. So he's just the ruler. We'll get to that later. He takes his army. He runs to Ascalon. And the Egyptians were in disarray. They weren't expecting this. And so they weren't set up properly. And he attacks them within their disarray. And a bunch of them fall back. They drop into the fortress. The rest of them escape. And the crusaders get another win. They don't capture Ascalon. But they definitely humiliate the Egyptian army and buy themselves some time. The Egyptians aren't done. Their leader is a guy named Al-Aftal Shahanshah. Now, Shahanshah is not Arabic. It's Persian. But Al-Aftal is. The best leader of leaders is his name. Dude, if you have that as your name, you need to get into politics. That's incredible. That's incredible. Anyway, so Al-Aftal is actually a slave. Isn't that weird? And he's actually Armenian. So the guy running the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt, it has a caliph, a khalifa. It has a Shia khalifa. The guy running it is actually an Armenian slave. There's an actual khalifa who's a Shia Arab. But the guy running it, the wazir, is an Armenian slave named the best leader of leaders. And he's like, we're not doing this. He sends an army. They attack Ramla. Godfrey is dead. Godfrey dies. We don't know why. There's one person says that he was killed in battle. Another person said he got sick. Another person said he was poisoned. Godfrey's dead. He was literally the ruler of Jerusalem for a year. He's replaced by Baldwin, the guy that captured Edessa. He comes down. It's his brother. So the chronicler said that when Baldwin received the news, he was very happy, but also a little sad that his brother had died. And he comes down, and he's crowned king. And that's the moment in the year 1100 that the kingdom of Jerusalem is officially going, because there's now a king. But Godfrey was at 1099 when they captured Jerusalem. He meets Al-Afdal at Ramla in 1101. And he defeats the Egyptian army. The Egyptian army withdraws. They come back the next year, because Al-Afdal is not going to give up easily. They attack Ramla. And this time, they beat the crusaders. The crusaders fall to Jaffa. And in the second battle at Jaffa, the crusaders win again. The Egyptians withdraw. They come back in 1105 to do it again. They attack Ramla. And they're defeated a third time. And the Egyptians give it a rest. They're like, OK, we're exhausted losing. In the meantime, something really critical happens for the purposes of how the crusades are going to unfold. And it's the Battle of Haran. So Haran used to be called Karhaye.

Karhaye is where the Romans fought the Persians for the first time in 53 BC. And the Romans were, I mean, just summarily defeated. It was a catastrophe. 26,000 Romans against 8,000 Persians. And the Persians maybe lost like 100, 150. And the Romans lost like 13,000 dead, 10,000 captured. So the crusaders are going to do another Karhaye, only the city's been renamed Haran. And the Muslim army comes out to meet it at Haran. It's southeast of Edessa. And the crusaders are defeated. They are beaten in the field. And in fact, one of the crusaders is captured. His name is Baldwin. But it's a different Baldwin. It's not the king of Jerusalem. It's his cousin. I think it's his cousin. And his cousin's name was Baldwin Borsk. That's what's in my, Borsk, I think is what it was. And he's become the count of Edessa when Baldwin becomes the king of Jerusalem. And so he goes into captivity. And he's stuck in captivity for four years. And while he's in captivity, Bohemond himself also gets captured. And he ends up in captivity. So there's two crusaders that are now out of the picture because they've been captured. And then Raimon decides he wants Terabolus. So Raimon was probably supposed to become the king. But for whatever reason, he decided he didn't want to be the king of Jerusalem. He wanted to be the king of Terabolus. So what he did was he set up a siege for Terabolus after they captured Jerusalem in 1102. And he's built a fortress north of Terabolus. And he's fighting day after day. The defenders of Tripoli come out late in 1104. They set his fortress on fire. Raimon himself is severely injured in the fire. He survives it but dies like three or four months later from his wounds. So the crusaders have now lost basically three, four of their top crusaders. Godfrey is dead. Raimon is dead. Bohemond is in captivity. Baldwin, spoiler alert, who will become Baldwin II, who will become the second king of Jerusalem, is in captivity. So that's a weird story, obviously. And so they're in trouble. By this point, most of the crusaders have actually gone home. In other words, if the Muslims had just attacked in an organized fashion at that moment, there was nothing to stop them from just taking it all back. But the Muslims are in such disarray. And each of these Turkish warlords, these Seljuk warlords, hates each other's guts so much they just won't cooperate together. It gets so weird that at some point, 1108, there's going to be a battle. Baldwin gets released. And Baldwin is going to make a deal with the ruler of Mosul. And he's going to field an army. So it's going to be a crusader army next to a Seljuk army. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight against each other. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight Tancred. Tancred ended up becoming the regent of Edessa while Baldwin was in prison. Tancred doesn't want to give it up. He doesn't want Baldwin to come back. Tancred goes and he gets Ridwan, the guy from Aleppo. So there's a Tancred. The crusader has a Muslim ally. And they're next to each other in the field. And they're going to fight a battle against a Muslim crusader army. And by the way, they defeat Jawali and Baldwin. They have to escape. And Tancred basically keeps Edessa as a result. He's eventually talked into participating in the siege of Tarabulus. They're going to actually try and take it once and for all. And when he does that, he reconciles with Baldwin. But here we are. It's 1108. The crusaders just captured Jerusalem nine years earlier. And there's a battle where there's Muslims and crusaders on both sides fighting each other. Like, it's already gone sideways in every way you can imagine. And that's the first part of the Crusades. Having said that, there's so much more to this story, which is what I warned you from the beginning. Like, I am not going to get through the Crusades. I literally got you to 1108. By the way, my goal was 1125. But I think I'm basically out of time. So I'm surrendering and accepting I'm not going to get to my goal.

But to put things in perspective, the second crusade is 1145. The kingdom of Jerusalem is going to go down in a ball of flames. In case you didn't know that, I hope I didn't spoil this for you. But in 1187, after the Battle of Hattin. So then the third crusade is after that. And then there's a fourth crusade in 1202. And so in other words, the Crusades are just going to keep going for a while. And they actually don't end by most people's. The usual number we use is 1291. So it's 195 years. I've just covered nine of it. Well, 12 if you include the, well, even more. 13 if you include the peasant crusade. By the way, there's supposedly a children crusade in this. It's a lot of fun. The Crusades were great. I'm going to tell you the children crusade. I'm going to let you go. It happens later. So this is out of time sequence. But it's just too fun since I mentioned it. A group of children think if they go and just show up in Jerusalem, the Muslims will give it back. Because this is after the Battle of Hattin. So they don't, children obviously walking from France to Palestine is a little tricky. So what they do is they walk to Venice. And they show up. And they ask, will you, the Venetian Navy, just take us? And the Venetians go, yeah, of course. It would be our sacred duty to take you. And the children are never heard from again. They were sold into slavery. The Venetians just put them on the ships, took them to slave markets, and just. Isn't that just capitalism? I'm pretty sure that's just capitalism. All right. Thank you for your time. And if you want to come see my show and tell, I'll stick around to let you do that. And actually, you know what? I'll field a question. And then I'll let you go. How about that? I always forget to do that. I actually don't always. No? No questions? OK, good. We're done.

I have some stuff I want to do before I jump in, and I also want to talk about what I'm going to do when I jump in so that it's not a complete surprise. So one of the things I want to do, I have a lot of trouble with, which is it's self-promotion. So I'm going to pass these around, these are just bookmarks. It's advertising my novel, and I brought a copy of my novel. So I have a novel, and it's The Blood Throne of Caria, and the reason I'm pushing it, and it makes me feel dirty doing this, so I'm probably just off a little bit, is because I'm ramping up to try and put out another novel, and if I can get a little bump in sales before that happens, it helps me. So if you like that kind of stuff, get my novel. That kind of stuff is historical fiction. I'm particularly obsessed with basically everything from Iran to Italy. That's like my zone where I obsess about. This is set in the 6th century, 5th century, 5th century B.C. in the southwest corner of Turkey. And it's about a real person, so it's historical fiction, but she doesn't have, her name is Artemisia, she doesn't have a lot of, how should we say this, there's a lot of attacks done on her by historians, and so my goal in writing this novel was to figure out what was true and what was a lie, and then correct the lie. But I can't claim it's the truth because it's speculation on my part, so hence historical fiction. Somebody's going to ask at some point what they should read. This is a fun way to start, it's The Crusades Through Arab Eyes, wouldn't that be a novel idea, by Amin Malouf. It's an old book, it's 1985 if I remember correctly, but there, now I've done that part. I also want to dedicate this talk to a group of people, so it's a small list, but I just want to do this. Omar, Saeed, Iman, Iman, Iman, and then Hadi, I'm probably forgetting somebody else I intended. You know what, I'm going to throw Jayden into the mix, he'll be like, oh my god, I can't believe you threw my name in there. I actually have a, I was just gifted a piece of rock from Palestine from the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and so I'm probably going to hold on to it the entire talk because, well, my talk is going to take place in Palestine mostly, so this is kind of a strange thing to have right now. Also, let's see, what did I do with it, I probably already lost it. I brought show and tell, but it won't work because the camera is too small and you're sitting too far away. I actually brought coins from the time period, so I will, after the talk, you can come up and look at it, and then what I'll do is we'll put, for the people who are watching this on video, I'll just put pictures up on it, but just to give you an idea of what I have, this is a coin from William II. It's after the period I'm talking about today because I'm not going to get to him. William II was the king of Sicily. The year in my head is 1153, but who knows. Anyway, the reason I brought it was because I am going to talk about the Normans, and I'm going to talk about Sicily a little bit for background purposes, and I kind of wanted to stick this in your head a little bit. On one side, the coin is written in Latin. On the other side, it's written in Arabic because the Normans took Sicily from the Arabs, and so they just made it so that they were a bilingual society. This, let me see, hold on, I'll do this one here. This coin is going to matter because this is Romanus IV, the Roman emperor. I'm going to talk about him in a little bit of detail, just briefly, because he's going to set things in motion that make the rest of the story possible, and then when you look at the coin, you'll see that the quality of the coin dramatically falls when you get to Alexios Komnenos. Alexios Komnenos becomes the Roman emperor just like 11 years later, and the quality of the coin is terrible compared to this one, so it makes you realize how far into decline the Romans had fallen. One of the things I'm going to do is I'm going to do a little bit of background, and in the process of doing the background talk, I'm going to bring up the birth of the Arab Empire.

We don't know what year this coin was minted because it doesn't have a year on it. It's actually a counterfeit coin. The Arabs, when they made their empire, needed coins, and they went and stole a Roman mint, and they began minting coins, Roman coins, so it has Latin letters on the back. It has three Roman emperors, well, an emperor and his two sons on the front. They're holding in one hand a cross, and in the other hand a globus cruciger with a cross sticking out of it, so there's literally six crosses on this coin, and this is the Arab Empire, one of the Arab Empire's first ever coins. It was minted during the Rashadin period. We don't know a date, so I can't tell you who, but most likely it would have been Uthman ibn Affan or the Khalifa Ali ibn Abi Talib. It's probably not one of the earlier two, and then this coin is Muawiyah I. He did the same thing. It's a Roman emperor with two crosses in his hand, and on the back, Latin letters, and one of the reasons why I wanted to sink that into your heads is to also show how the boundary between things is really blurry, right? We're a society of people who want to put everything into categories, including ourselves. We can't wait to label ourselves, and we keep breaking it down further and further, and the reality is these categories are all imaginary and made up. Nobody is that easy to categorize, you know what I mean, let alone whole societies, especially societies where everything is blurred together. I probably have said Arabic words, for example, that are English in this. I wasn't paying attention, but you know, at one point I might say the word nadir or zenith or zero, and then by contrast, Arabic is filled with Latin words. For example, the word faloos, the word for money, comes from pholos. It literally was, one of those coins was a pholos that I was holding up, and so the word is actually Latin. It's not Arabic. It's just the Arabs used the Latin word. Cres, the word for cherries, comes from crassinus, which is the Latin word for cherry, and it can go on and on because everything is stuck together. All right, so as Eric Deggans would say, I'm going to do a bunch of table setting. Eric Deggans is a TV critic that I listen to on NPR, and he recently complained about too much table setting, but I don't know how to not do table setting, and the reason I have to do the table setting is if I just jump into the Crusades and start talking about it, it'll be entertaining because there's a lot of violence. Like, if you enjoy People Massacred, and I know you do because I watch the same movies you do, then this is a great story because it is gory, but it's kind of helpful to know why it happened, and how did we even get into the situation where it was possible. So I can't skip that. Having said that, I have no intention and no belief that I can, even if I wanted to, cover the entire Crusades. So in other words, this is part one. You're just setting this up now. I will try to do the entire Crusades, but I'm betting I'm going to have to do four parts. One of the reasons I don't know is, some of you have figured this out about me, I don't write my lectures out, so I actually don't know what I'm going to say until it starts happening, and so as a result, I don't know how the timing of this is going to land, so it'll be fun. I'm exploring this with you, and we'll see where it goes. It'll probably be a train wreck, and people will hate it, but it'll be fun for me anyway, and that's the important thing. All right, so, to do this, I need to introduce some actors. The first actor I want to introduce is probably the most important actor in the story, and it's the Arabs. And the reason they're the most important, obviously, is because the Crusaders are going to invade the Arab world to fulfill their goal of making a kingdom of Jerusalem. So, the Arabs created an empire that most people don't refer to, don't talk about, that's basically been deleted from history. It's the Arab empire, although I've frequently heard it referred to as the Muslim empire.

The reason you need to not do that and call it the Arab empire is the Arab empire was created by Arabs, like the Roman empire was created by Romans. We don't call it the pagan empire, and when it becomes Christian, we don't call it the Christian empire, right? When it becomes Japanese, we don't call them the Shinto Buddhist empire, you know what I mean? When Alexander the Great made his empire, we don't call it the pagan empire. So, why would we do this in this one particular case? And what I'm going to pose to you is the reason we usually don't even name it, and if we do, we sometimes call it the Muslim empire, is because of anti-Arab hate. We have that running through the core of our society, the core of our civilization, and one of the reasons is because of the events that led to the Crusades and the Crusades themselves. In other words, by doing anti-Arab hate, you're perpetuating this old wound. It's time to let it go. Although, by the time we're done tonight, you'll be like, oh my gosh, what's that about? So, it'll be good. The Arabs began making their empire, and by empire, I mean it in the true sense of the word empire. To be clear, a state that rules multiple countries and nations. That's all you need to be to be an empire. Having said that, you could claim that in the United Kingdom today, what's left of the great empire is still an empire, because Great Britain is Wales, England, and Scotland. That's three countries. And then, throw in Northern Ireland, Gibraltar, Bermuda, and the Falkland Islands and Malvinas, and you end up with multiple countries, right? Or at least pieces of multiple countries. So, they began making their empire in 633, when the first Khalifa, Abu Bakr, launches his armies into the Persian and Roman Empires simultaneously, in what should have been a completely insane, impossible, can't-be-done event. And it's not only done, but by 711, the Arab Empire became the largest empire on the planet to that date. There have been larger empires since, but there had never been a larger empire before this. It stretched, by 711, from Spain to Pakistan. It went all the way into Central Asia. So, if you can conjure a map of the Roman Empire, it owned about 60% of the Roman Empire. Conjure a map of the Persian Empire, it owned 100% of the Persian Empire. And it went into Central Asia, and it went into India. Fine? For those of you, because I just said Pakistan, for those of you who don't know, the British cruelly and sadistically cut Pakistan out of India. Pakistan is India. It's just, you know how the Brits are. It's divide and conquer, wreck, destroy, ruin. India is named after the Indus River, which is 100% in Pakistan. It's just cruel. You know what I mean? Anyway, so, this Arab Empire, by the way, when it was born, it had a tiny Muslim population. But by 711, it had a few more Muslims. It was maybe 5-10% of the population was Muslim. The empire itself was majority Christian, 60% Christian. In fact, probably somewhere around 60% of the world's entire Christian population was in the Arab Empire. Isn't that hard to comprehend? The majority of the world's Christians lived in the Arab Empire, an empire that was majority Christian. In 711. So, the empire has been around that, right? From 633 to 711, it's already been around for a few decades. It's not like it was just born. One of the reasons why Muslims are such a small percentage of the population is they didn't convert by the sword. There was no compulsion to become Muslim. At first, what the Muslim conquerors did was they said, if you're Christian or Jewish, you worship the book. Therefore, you have a pathway to heaven. So, you have to be treated like a full human. But then, as they kept conquering, they kept running into other religions. And they just kept extending it. So, the Zoroastrians, okay, yeah, why not? And, right, centuries later, by the time they're in India proper, they're like, yeah, Hindus too, it's all good. We're going to make this work. Right?

That was what kept happening. By the way, the Arab Empire in 711 was probably about five, ten percent Buddhist, just to mess with you. Afghanistan had a giant Buddhist population. So, it seems counterintuitive, but there it is. That empire gets into a conversation with itself. And the conversation it has with itself stems from a problem that they had. The Arabs had never ruled themselves, let alone ruled an empire, right? Until this moment. 633, the year they launched the empire, is the year the Arabs, for the first time in history, ruled the entire Arabian Peninsula. So, they don't even catch their breath. They conquer the Arabian Peninsula, put it under a single state, and then they just go, they just keep going. Next thing you know, they've conquered the Persian Empire, and they've conquered the majority of the Roman Empire, and they're in France, trying to conquer France. What was the Battle of Tours? 732 is in my head, I hope that's not wrong. So, this empire has a problem. Arabs don't know how to run an empire. They've never run an empire before. Normally, conquerors are arrogant, and they're cruel, and they're sadistic. Like, take the Romans. So, I'm part Italian. So, for those of you that like being mean to Italians, a little bit, but it's okay. Gaius Julius Caesar, the guy you incorrectly called Julius Caesar, when he conquered Gaul, there were three million people living in Gaul. When he left, there was one million people living in Gaul. He murdered one million, he enslaved one million, and then he looked at the remaining million and went, welcome to the Republic. By the way, we'd like for you to worship our gods. Let's have your taxes now. Oh, and we're going to steal your technology. That's what conquerors often did, right? The Arabs, on the other hand, were humble about this, and they told the Romans and the Persians they had conquered, we don't know what we're doing, we don't know how to do this. We want to just leave you where you are. You're a bureaucrat, you're running this province, don't stop, and then we'll watch you. Maybe we'll figure it out, but in a few generations, hopefully we'll have this sorted out. In the meantime, I'm going to counterfeit this money over here. It's got crosses on it, but that's okay. I'm okay with that. I like Jesus. And that was kind of their conversation. So, the reason that matters is Muawiyah, I showed you the coin. Muawiyah I moves the capital after a civil war that lasts five years, that ends in 661. He moves the capital to Damascus from Medina. When he puts the capital in Damascus, he puts it in a former Roman city. And that matters, because it meant that the bureaucrats around Muawiyah are shaping the policies he's creating, and it orients the Arabs in the Arab empire west. It orients them towards the Romans. And in fact, he's going to lay siege to Constantinople. He won't capture it. But then a subsequent Arab the next century is going to do it again, and they'll fail a second time. Had they captured Constantinople on either of those two, they would have taken out the Romans too, because they had already conquered the Persians. Yazdegerd III was the last Persian emperor. He's gone. Persians are done. But the Romans are still hanging on. For the record, what saved the Romans was the emperor put out a contest. He said, anybody who can invent something that can save us, I will give you a sum of money. A Syrian refugee, isn't that cool? Isn't that weird, a refugee? I thought we were supposed to put them in cages. Anyway, a Syrian refugee invented a flamethrower. So what happened was the Roman Navy had a chain blocking the vulnerable north end of Constantinople. They had a chain that went across, so the Arab Navy couldn't get through it. And the Roman Navy was hiding behind the chain, this big chain. And the Romans pulled up the chain, and the Roman Navy started coming out. The Arabs are like, why are they coming? We'll just sink them. This is suicide. And the Romans came right up on them.

And the Arabs had no idea they had flamethrowers. And they just opened up and set the Arab fleet on fire. And that's how they saved Constantinople. Anyway, that's why you should never turn away Syrian refugees. That is the rule on that one. Or is the rule you should make them. Sorry, I went to a dark place. All right, so in 750, there's a coup d'etat. The Abbasids overthrow the Umayyads. And they move the capital to a brand new city that they've just built on a village. The village is called Baghdad. It's a Persian village. And they move the capital to this city. They rename it Medina Tassalam, the City of Peace. And they build this amazing fortress system. It's a two-layer fortress system. It's incredible. The city should be impossible to capture. And science and commerce and philosophy pour into the city. Art pours into the city. And the city grows really fast and becomes a major city really quickly. But it's in Iraq, which was Persian, not necessarily ethnically, by the way. There was a huge Arab population in Syria during Roman period and a huge Arab population in Iraq already. What I mean is it was the Persian Empire. But there were also a lot of Persians as well because they were intermingled. Because you've got to remember, this is a pre-nationalistic society. It's before people went, oh, my DNA is better than DNA by virtue of my race or by virtue of my nation. Back then it was, I was born in this city and that makes me better than you. It was city discrimination, which is fun. We have that a little bit. Like whenever a Houstonian walks up to you, you know he's from. Anyway, so this means that the conversation changes. Because now it's got a Persian orientation because the Abbasids are surrounded by Persian bureaucrats. And those Persian bureaucrats have two agendas. One, to shift the attention of the Arab Empire east. And two, to destroy it. That is their goal. They are going to break this thing. The reason is, is because most of the countries that the Arabs conquered adapted and began to speak Arabic. Or at least there was a large population slowly starting to speak Arabic. Like Arabic probably didn't become the major language in Egypt until about 900 AD. But there was already a population of people speaking Arabic for commercial purposes and for political purposes by this point. The Persians weren't learning Arabic. They were holding onto their identity and their language. They had converted to Islam, but they weren't going to convert to being Arab. So right, ethnically Egyptians aren't actually Arab. But culturally and linguistically, they're 100% Arab. I keep running into conversations with people like, well, Egyptians aren't real Arabs. Oh, do they still speak ancient Egyptian? I miss that. I mean, they do. If you go to a Coptic church and listen to the liturgy, they do it in Coptic. Coptic is ancient Egyptian. Ancient Egyptian is as alive in Egypt as Latin is in Italy. You can hear it. It's not dead dead. It's just mostly dead. Right? And so what it means to be Arab is really more of a linguistic thing than it is an ethnic thing. It's not a DNA thing. It's do you speak Arabic? Well, the Persians rejected that. They refused. They resisted. And so little by little, they start to pick at the Arab empire from within, because they're the bureaucrats running it now. And pieces of the Arab empire start to come off. If I remember correctly, the first piece comes off, well, the first piece comes off in 756. Spain. One of the Umayyads escaped the Abbasids. They massacred the Umayyads. They tried to kill all of them so there would be no rivals out there causing them problems. Well, one of them got away. He snuck through Egypt. He went across North Africa. He went to Spain. And in 756, six years after the Abbasid revolt, he pulls Spain out of the empire. And so the empire is already starting to come apart in 756. I think 727 is the next time a major piece comes out. And that's over in Persia. And little by little, the Arab empire starts to disintegrate.

Eventually, it will lose all of North Africa and Persia. And as it's shrinking, the khalifa, the system where you had a person who was a religious and a political authority, is starting to become symbolic. And they're being replaced by wazirs. They're being placed by ministers. And so there's actually now a secular leader who's running the show. And the khalifa is becoming a symbolic leader who's mostly just confined to a palace in Baghdad and has no meaningful role other than to walk around the garden looking pretty. And by the time that happens, it also means that the person who has the best position symbolically to unify people has no political power, which is bad if you're trying to hold things together. I can't give you an exact date when the Arab empire stops functioning. But it's pretty finished by 900. I've seen the year 833 used as well. I think you can have an argument about when that's happened. By the time the Buyids are running Baghdad, it's over. There's no two ways about it. The Buyids were Persians who had broken out Iraq and a huge chunk of Iran and were ruling it on their own. And of course, the reason that matters now is if there is going to be a European invasion down the road, there isn't an empire to stop it. Well, there will be, because I'm going to have to introduce another actor, and it's the Seljuks. In 1037, a group of Turkish warriors begin to conquer the Middle East. And they create an empire to replace the Arab empire. And that empire is the Seljuk empire. So for the record, Turks are from Central Asia. They are in the same cultural linguistic group as Mongolians, Koreans, and the Japanese. I'm going to let you sit on that one for a moment. I take that in. Japanese, Koreans, Mongolians, and Turks are the same cultural linguistic group. Do this as an exercise. Find a Turk and stand up next to a Korean and have the Koreans start speaking Korean and have the Turks start speaking Turkish. It is crazy cool. It is very, very super cool. You should totally do this experiment. You can. They exist here in Austin. Just start looking for them. The Turks are starting to move into the Middle East for multiple reasons, one of them being they're serving as mercenaries. Another one is they're just looking for land to inhabit. It's a migration. There are immigrants coming in. And by 1037, they're politically in a position where they start conquering. And they end up conquering a huge chunk of the Asian part that the Arab empire had. I'm making this number up because I never measured it. But they probably ended up with about 30% of the Arab empire, maybe a little bit more. Maybe a third of the Arab empire. Let me introduce another actor, the Roman Empire. So I've said this before in lectures. So people who have seen my previous lectures will probably be annoyed with me because I'm just repeating myself. But I have to a little bit because I'm going to assume that you haven't. And that way it makes sense. When I was a kid, when I was an adult, I was taught that the Roman Empire fell on September 4, 476 AD. This is one of my big pet peeves about the way we teach history. The Roman Empire did not fall on September 4, 476 AD. That's just a lie. There's nothing even remotely truthful about it. What happened on September 4 is Romulus Augustus, the Western Roman emperor, took off his purple robes, stuck it in a box with a note attached to the box that said, we don't need two emperors anymore. We just need one emperor. And he sent it to Emperor Zeno. Emperor Romulus Augustus was in Ravenna, Italy. That was the capital of the Western Roman Empire at that time. They had long since abandoned Rome. The city of Rome existed. It was largely empty, though. It had 1 and 1 half million people at its height. And at that point, there were 40,000 people. Can you imagine walking through the streets of a city that at one point had 1 and 1 half million people and there's only 40,000 people there? Talk about ghost town. What was that like?

And of course, most of those houses and buildings have collapsed, and they're in ruins. But still, that must have just been a trip. We were great ones. What happened to us? This is terrible. And then you look at the coins, and they were striking at the time. And you're like, dude, what happened to your artists? They all died, too? Find some artists. So what happened was the Roman Empire fell on May 29, 1453. So when you were a kid, probably this happened. It happened to me. People would go, we don't know why the Roman Empire fell. Maybe it was the gladiators. They stopped doing the gladiating like centuries earlier. So probably not. Maybe it was the orgies and the eating festivals. They also stopped doing some of that, too. I mean, they still had a little bit of that going. But not as much as they did during the Republic. That was the height of that. You know what I mean? That was the good old days. So that's probably not it. Lead pipes. If lead pipes was a problem, we're in trouble. I don't know if you know this, but we have lead pipes in the United States. All the urban centers have lead pipes, as Flint found out. So probably not the lead pipes, either. For the record, what happens is hard water calcifies the inside of the lead pipes, and then the lead is no longer a problem because there's basically a salt layer inside the pipe protecting you from the lead. But then your city council decides they don't have enough money. Why? Because we went through a tax-cutting frenzy because somebody went, taxes are evil. They pay for things like water. What do you mean taxes are evil? Roads. Where do you think roads come from? Schools. Schools are also taxes. Hospitals, scientific research, police departments, fire departments. It's not the Libertarian Ferry that delivers that stuff. That's taxes. Unless you're lucky and you had a bunch of oil, like Texas does. Anyway, but it's OK. We keep our electric grid functioning just as well as Egypt does. So that's amazing. It's fun living in a third world country again. You know what I mean? It's very familiar. I go to Mexico in the summer so I have electricity. Also, by the way, it's cooler. Push that through your brain. I still can't get over that. I'm very confused about that. So I've derailed myself. Why did I go down that path? So here's what happened. I was taught we don't know why the Romans collapsed. But we do know why the Romans collapsed. And the reason we know why the Romans collapsed is because I can actually tell you the exact day the Romans collapsed. I don't know what it's telling me. Actually, it's telling me you need to go. The Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453. The reason why the Romans collapsed on May 20, you thought I was kidding, the reason why the Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453, and I can tell you exactly why, is because an Ottoman army captured the last Roman capital, Constantinople. Constantinople was the last piece of Roman real estate. In other words, there's no mystery why the Romans fell apart, the Roman Empire fell apart. It fell apart because it was conquered. And we know the exact moment it was conquered. In other words, there's no reason to have doubt about the date that the Roman Empire fell. Here's what happened. There was a guy named Hieronymus Wulf. About a hundred years after the Roman Empire fell, and I want to say a hundred years, but that's probably wrong, somewhere around 1550, right? The Roman Empire fell 1453. He decided he was going to rewrite history on purpose and tell a really big lie on purpose. He had two goals. One, he wanted to divorce the Roman Empire from its ignominious defeat at the hands of the Muslims. The Roman Empire was a Christian empire. He was a Christian. He was a German. And he hated the idea that Muslims had conquered the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire had been defeated by Ottoman Turks. And so he decided he was going to move the date of the conquest of the Roman Empire to a hundred years earlier, lie to everybody, and people would accept the lie because it would divorce the end of the Roman Empire from the Muslims.

And then the second goal was, in 476, Odo Vakur, the German, declared himself the king of Italy. Now, to be clear, he left Italy in the Roman Empire. He didn't separate Italy from the Roman Empire. So Italy just became, instead of a set of provinces, it became one kingdom with Odo Vakur, the ruler, who sent taxes to Emperor Zeno and flew a Roman flag. It's weird, but it also means Italy is still in the Roman Empire. But because Odo Vakur was a German, then Hieronymus Wolf could say, the Germans took out the Roman Empire. But it's not true. It's a lie. It's a bald-faced lie. So by the time we get to the Crusades, there's a Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire is playing a major role. And the reason the Roman Empire is playing a major role is it's been in decline for a long time. When I say the Roman Empire fell in 1453, you have to remember that's after 2,200 years. The Romans aren't quite as long as the Egyptians in terms of the length of their history, right? When the Romans conquered Egypt in 31 BC, Egypt was a 4,500-year-old civilization, right? It's not quite on that scale, but it's really close. It's half that scale. And Rome had been in decline since the 200s. In other words, Rome had been on its way out for 13 centuries. So for more than half of the length of time that Rome had been around, it was struggling to survive. That's what you call tenacity, resilience. That's incredible. Who survives barely making it for that long? At one point, they actually do get conquered. And they manage to put themselves back together and reconstitute themselves and just keep going. They break up on multiple occasions. Zenobia is my favorite. There was a woman who led a rebellion in Syria, and she captured Syria, Turkey, Palestine, and Egypt, and she made her own little empire. They were too sexist to let a woman rule, so she made her six-year-old son the actual emperor. But she ruled, and his name was Wabalathus. Wabalathus. Isn't that a cool name? Anyway, and by the way, Palmyra was her capital. So sort of a strange twist, right? She was like in the middle of Syria, made her capital there. Don't worry, the Romans killed her. Something like that's not going to be allowed. And they put the empire back together, and then it fell apart. It was like an accordion. The Arabs come, tear them up. The Germans tear them up. It's a mess. The Huns tear them up. The Bulgarians tear them up. It's just wave after wave until they finally just go down once and for all in 1453. But by the time the story of the Crusades is happening, the Romans are desperately trying to hold on to what is today Turkey. I'm going to use Anatolia just because I think it makes it a little bit less confusing, at least in my brain. Anatolia was the name at the time. Turkey is the name today because it's the Turks' habit, right? They've named it after themselves. Another actor I want to introduce might sound strange. It's the Vikings. I'm going to tell you something really strange. The Vikings are one of the reasons why the Crusades happened. Isn't that weird? You're like, wait, why? Work with me here on this one because it's kind of strange. So the Vikings were Germans. They were the Germans who settled Scandinavia. Scandinavia was kind of like the worst piece of real estate in Europe at the time. Today, obviously, it's like heaven. But back then, it was the garbage piece that nobody wanted to go to. In other words, the people who became the Vikings, they never called themselves Viking. Viking is a term we've retroactively put on top of them, like the term Byzantine that Hieronymus Wolf came up with for the Roman Empire's last 1,000 years, 977 years for those of you who want it to be more precise. There's no such thing as a Byzantine Empire. The Vikings, I'm going to use the term Viking anyway, though. The Vikings got stuck with this piece of real estate where you really couldn't grow a crop. So pretty much all you could do was raise cattle and go fishing. And at some point, their population had reached a threshold.

They had sort of reached the carrying capacity of cheese rolls and dried fish. And when that happened, they had no choice but to start looking for alternatives. And they took two approaches, by the way. One approach the Vikings did was they set out to start trading. They thought, you know what? We can fix our problem if we can do trade, because we'll have the money to buy the food that we need. And the Eastern Vikings, the Swedes, got so into this, they actually started trying to figure out where they could go to. And they started reading their sagas. This is the 8th century. Not reading their sagas. They were oral histories. They were listening to their sagas. And the sagas told the Vikings that the place the Germans were from was Iran. By the way, Kermani-Iran, which is where we get the word German, because ga and ka, when languages change over time, are interchangeable. So Kerman, German. We say German because we pronounce it like a French person would. But a German says German, right? So if you're saying the study of Germanic studies, it's Germanismus, because they don't say it the way a French person would. So the sagas tell the Vikings you're originally from Persia. So the Swedes go, wow, that's an idea. Let's go. Let's see what we can find. And so what they would do is they would go to what is today Latvia. They would take their long ships up the Dvina River. They'd go as far inland as you could get, pretty close to the city of Rzhev. They would pull their ships out of the water, fully loaded, because they have to carry their supplies. They can't leave the supplies behind. So they would carry these fully loaded ships over land until they got to the Volga River. I mean, that's a pretty manly, you know what I mean? Like, they've got their armor and their weapons. And they're hauling these. I want to go backwards in time just to see this. You know there was a lot of grunting. And then they put the ship in the Volga River. And they sailed the Volga River all the way to the Caspian Sea. And they went down the Caspian Sea to the Persian coast. And they're like, hi. And the Arabs had just conquered Persia a couple of centuries earlier. And they're walking around Persia going, what is all this? You have modern agriculture and modern medicine. And you're doing philosophy. And you've invented zero. And you're doing algebra. And the Vikings are like, we don't even have a written language. We shouldn't have left. We could have had this. And they began trading. Now, to supplement their trading on that long trade route, they would also raid. And they would attack the Slavic populations along the way. And they would take some for slaves. And then they would sell them into the slave markets, make a little bit of extra koi. So maybe that. Full disclosure, I'm a quarter Swedish. So if there's a little bit too much admiration on my part, it's just ugly nationalism. The Western Vikings started raiding England. And then they started expanding where they raided. And before you knew it, they were just raiding all of northern and Western Europe. And in the process, they start to get some amazing victories. So you know, London Bridge is falling down, falling down. That's because it did. That's because my ancestors took out London Bridge. That song is based on a real event. Isn't that cool? I think it is. And so the Vikings actually end up conquering places like England. They get multiple kings of England. Cnut the Great, of course, the most famous. But there's also Svein Forkbeard. Isn't that a cool name? Svein Forkbeard. And they end up ruling this empire that stretches across Scandinavia and England. And they were doing all right for themselves. And they got their eyes on Paris. And they thought, you know what? Let's go take France. I don't know why not. We've got Latvia and Estonia and Finland and Ukraine, right? Because the Vikings, eventually the Ukrainian nobles couldn't figure out how to rule their lands. So they started hiring Viking mercenaries.

The group of Viking mercenaries they hired were the Rus, R-U-S. And the Rus eventually created Kievan Rus because they realized they were the only armed guys. And they didn't know why they were taking orders from anybody. And they just took over. And that's how Russia was founded. Isn't that crazy? Anyway, they almost got Paris. Long story short, they were on the island. They were battering down doors. They were scaling the walls. They almost got Paris. It was so close. And so after they failed to get Paris, the French came out. And they went, OK, that was too close. You almost got us. If you get a second shot, we don't think we're making it. So what do we do? We're not surrendering, surrendering. We're not giving you Paris. We're going to make you fight for it if you try to get it again. But we really don't want you to try again. We're going to meet you somewhere. And they make a deal with a guy named Rollo. And the deal is Northern France. They give Rollo Northern France. Now the Vikings, I told you, weren't called Vikings. They were called the Northmen, or depending on your language, Norsemen, or Nordmen, or Normans. And so the Vikings named Northern France after themselves. They called it Normandy. And they began ruling it. But they had a problem. And that was that the French peasants wouldn't learn German. They wouldn't learn to speak the dialects of German that the Vikings were speaking. They kept insisting on speaking French. And so the Norman nobility, Rollo, by the way, got Normandy in 911. The Norman nobility now has to learn French so that when they're abusing their peasants, the peasants understand the abuse. It doesn't help to shout at a peasant and then they don't understand you. You need them to understand. So they learn French. And what that does then is it sets us up for a really strange set of events. Somebody gets a great idea just a few decades later, 999, so 911 to 999, so 88 years later, to hire Norman mercenaries in southern Italy. And so Norman mercenaries start to travel from Northern France all the way to southern Italy. And they're being used by everybody. They're being used by the Romans, who are trying to hold on to southern Italy. They had it. They're losing it. They're trying to get it back. The Roman emperor at the time is a guy named Basil II. You want to laugh, but he was one of the greatest Roman emperors of the time period. And he went on a conquering spree and he starts carving up territory that the Romans had lost and he's putting it back in, including taking lands, Muslim lands. He actually brings the Roman Empire back to Syria and he captures Antioch and the northern end of Syria. The part of Syria that today is in Turkey is basically what he recaptured. So when the Ottoman Empire broke up, the Europeans showed up with a crayon and a napkin and they just began drawing borders. And you look at the border between Saudi Arabia and Jordan or Jordan and Iraq and you're like, why'd you do that? And they sneezed or something. Somebody got bumped and an extra wiggle line popped up. And they did that with Syria. They just chopped off the northern part and gave it to Turkey. So Basel II is re-carving the Roman Empire, but at the same time, there's all these forces pushing back and everybody's using Normans as mercenaries. That must have been awkward. You see your cousin on the other side. How much are you getting paid? And you fight for a little while. I'll pretend to kill you, OK? Don't swing at me. What eventually happens is those Normans go, why are we fighting for these other guys? And in 1030, the first Norman gets made a lord in southern Italy. And he slowly starts to conquer. And subsequent generations of Normans start to take pieces of southern Italy. And in 1061, the Normans are getting on ships and they're crossing over to Sicily. And they begin conquering Sicily. Sicily had been conquered by the Arabs two centuries earlier. The Normans also start getting hired by the Roman Empire in Anatolia, because they're being used to fight the Seljuks, who are coming west and fighting their way into Anatolia.

And so the Romans are using these Norman mercenaries in, I showed you the coin of Romanus IV. In 1071, Romanus IV has an army at a place called Manzikert. And they fight a battle against the Seljuks. And they're defeated. The Romans are defeated. The Normans take off after they were defeated. They just move out of the way. But the Romans get captured, including Romanus IV. He was taken. The Seljuks offered a ransom. The Romans are like, no, we don't ransom you. And they replaced him. The reason that mattered was the Norman commander, Russel de Baerl, decides he's going to do in Anatolia, in the middle of Turkey, by the way, Galatia. So right in the New Testament, Galatians, those are the letters that Paul writes to the Celts living in Anatolia. He decides he's going to carve out a little kingdom for himself in Galatia. And the Normans go on a conquering spree. And they make Ankara, Ankara, the capital of a Norman kingdom in the middle of Turkey. There are French-speaking Vikings ruling the middle of Turkey, which is historically populated by Celts. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. Historically populated by Celts, you know, kilt-wearing, bagpipe-playing Celts, because everything is actually intermingled and there's no boundaries. And the next thing you know, the Roman emperor is actually turning to the Seljuks and going, dude, can you help us with this guy? And the Seljuks, the ruler, the sultan, the sultanate of Rome, that's what they call themselves. Their flag was a two-headed eagle. The Roman flag was a two-headed eagle. Because when Emperor Romulus Augustus takes off his purple robes and sends it to Emperor Zeno, they've now unified the west and the east. They only have one emperor. So their new symbol for the Roman Empire is an eagle with two heads, one facing left, one facing right. Well, the Seljuks in Anatolia take that as their flag because their goal isn't to destroy the Roman Empire. It's to make a Muslim Roman Empire. Their goal is to eventually capture Constantinople one day. They don't hate the Roman Empire. They admire the Roman Empire. They want to be the Roman Empire. And so Suleiman I, the Seljuk sultanate of Rome, gets a request from the emperor, the Roman emperor, to go put down this Norman uprising. And he's baffled out of his mind. But yeah, sure, I'll help you. And in 1077, that Norman little kingdom vanishes. In 1084, the pope asks for an army to attack Spain. Spain was, at that time, majority-controlled by Muslims. The furthest north city that the Muslims owned in 1084 was a city called Barbastro. And so the pope asks for a Christian army to go to Barbastro and take it. One quarter of that army was a group of Normans. When they capture the city at first, they're pillaging it. They're slaughtering people. But the Normans decide they like the place and they stay. And the majority of the population is still Arab and it's still Muslim. And the Normans who stay start dressing like the Arabs. And they learn Arabic. And they're really digging Arab society. And they go Injun. And they go native. And it shocks everybody because it's like, wait, these French-speaking, blue-eyed, blonde Vikings are in Spain learning Muslim culture. And in a way, when you think about it, all three of these events that I just described are like little precursor crusades. In 1095, the pope holds two conventions. Both of them were in November. And Alexius Comnenus, Alexius I, the Roman Empire, comes to Italy. And this isn't a small thing because Italy isn't Roman. In fact, the pope in Rome and the Roman Empire have had a falling out that has lasted centuries. And they hate each other's guts a lot, not a little bit, a lot. So what happened was, as the Roman Empire was disintegrating, they managed to hold onto pieces of Italy, including the city of Rome. But the pope in Rome didn't like that because the original church had five patriarchs.

So the Orthodox Catholic Church. Orthodox is truth. Catholic is universal. So the Universal Truth Church, that was the original name of the Christian church. It had already had a schism. The Copts in Egypt had broken away in 284. But in the 700s, the church was still unified. But the pope in Rome came to resent the circumstances because the five patriarchs were the pope in Rome, the pope in Alexandria, the patriarch of Antioch, and the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Jerusalem. In other words, the original Christian church had five heads, two popes, two patriarchs, and an archbishop. By the way, pope came from the pope would have his child on his knee. And then people would come to kiss his ring. And they would hear the child saying, papa, papa. And it just stuck. Do you want me to say that again? The pope would have his child on his knee. You know, his kid. His kid, because the original Catholic Church didn't have a celibacy thing. They did the celibacy thing later so that they could make sure that the clergy didn't pass churches and church property down in their wills and illegitimate children in Europe couldn't inherit. So that's how that, that's why that happened. It wasn't to stop the popes from having babies. It was to stop the popes from having legitimate babies. It wasn't to stop the clergy from having families. It's just to stop the clergy from having legitimate families so they couldn't pass on church land. So anyway, in 756, the pope in Rome is sick of the fact that he's kind of second fiddle. He wants to be first fiddle. After all, it's Rome. It's Roman Empire. So he goes and he makes a deal with the Franks. And they break Rome out of the Roman Empire. It's Pope Stephen II who does this in 756. 763, Naples was still in the Roman Empire. Duke Stephen II, two different guys, same name, makes it easy to remember. 763, Naples breaks out of the Roman Empire and joins the pope in creating this papal state thing. Naples is never part of the papal states, but the idea that it's now going to be a separate thing from the Roman Empire, it breaks away. And the animosity between Rome and Constantinople just keeps growing and growing and growing until 1058. In 1058, they get into a spat that's so bitter and so nasty, they start to excommunicate each other. The patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates the pope. The pope excommunicates the patriarch. Next thing you know, they're interdicting. Interdicting is when you excommunicate whole cities, whole countries, whole regions, whole provinces. They start interdicting each other. And before they're done, Western Europe has completely interdicted Eastern Europe. And Eastern Europe has completely interdicted Western Europe. And the East took the truth, and the West took the universe. And that's why there's a Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, and a Greek Orthodox church. So when Alexios Komnenos goes to Italy in 1095, it's 37 years after they had just done this to each other. So the wounds are raw. They're fresh. And the reason Alexios Komnenos is there is he says, we're not making it. The sultanate of Rome has just taken almost all of Anatolia. We maybe have 10% of it left. We're finished to the east, which means all we have is a little piece of Southeastern Europe. We need your help. And Pope Urban II goes, you know what we should do? We shouldn't just help you a little bit. We should go all out. Let's retake the Holy Land and put it back in the Roman Empire. And Alexios Komnenos goes, yeah, why not? Let's do it. Let's make this happen. And so Pope Urban II comes out of those two talks, meeting with these top officials, including the Roman emperor, and says, I want an army to go to Jerusalem. We're going to conquer all of that and put it back in the Roman Empire. Let's go. 1096, a guy named Peter the Hermit gets up in front of everybody and says, we heard the pope loud and clear. Let's do this. And he puts together what's called the People's Crusade. It's basically just a bunch of peasants, some knights.

It's not the mercenary soldiers. It's not the knight. It's not all knights, right? It's just some peasants. They turn into a mob. And the first thing they do to sanctify the Crusades, this holy religious war, is they attack the Jews living in Germany. And the estimate is they murder about 2,000 Jews, and then they rape like 7,000 more Jews. And then they leave Germany on their way to the Holy Land to... I missed something. I feel like they read a piece of the New Testament that I... Did I? Where does it say that? Before thou goest on the crusade, holiest of holy, do what Jesus would have you do, slaughter Jews in Germany. Did I? And that is the first pogrom. That is the first documented case where Europeans, specifically post-Roman Empire, the Roman Empire hated Jews. Just like it was a hobby for them. They mostly did it in Palestine, right? It was just, ah, the Jews again. They keep throwing rocks at us. That's going to be ironic in a few centuries. So that's the first pogrom. 1096. That army works its way all the way to Constantinople. When it gets to Constantinople, Alexios Komnenos, they've been raiding the whole way because they need to feed themselves. So they're sacking villages. They're tearing into people's food stores. It's a disaster. It's a raiding mob. It shows up at Constantinople. Alexios Komnenos is like, I got to get rid of these guys as fast as I can. He goes, you know what you got to do? You got to cross the Bosporus. Here's my fleet. He puts them on a ship and he sends them across the Bosporus and they set up a camp. They actually attack a town. They capture it. And he's like, I'll send you food. You just stay on your side of the Bosporus. This is going to work out great. In the meantime, he's actually calling the Turks on the phone. Hey, there's some crazy dudes. I just deposited them on your end. Good luck with that. The guy who's now the son of Suleiman I, his name is Khalid Arslan. He decides he's got to get rid of these guys. And they want to take Nicaea. So Nicaea is pronounced Nicaea. I'm going to not say Nicaea again for the rest of the lecture. It drives me nuts. It's like Julius Caesar is Gaius Julius Caesar. Stop saying Julius Caesar. I feel like it could be a salad dressing or something. You know what I mean? It doesn't have to be the name of that guy. Nicaea was the capital for the Sultanate of Rome. So they actually put it almost across from Constantinople. And the reason is because that's their goal. It's Constantinople. They're nowhere near capturing it. They know that. But that's still, you know, it's nice to have a goal, even if it's a far off one. And so they've got Nicaea. It's like poison. And the mob, the peasant mob, the People's Crusade, as it's called, thinks it's going to capture Nicaea. And Clege Arslan basically sets up an ambush for them and slaughters them. And that's the end of the People's Crusade, for the most part. By the way, some of the leadership got away. Because, of course, that's how that usually works out. In any case, the real Crusader army doesn't show up until the next year. The real Crusader army is a mixture of nobles from across France and Germany, primarily, but also Italy, because there's Normans coming. So for our purposes, there's a bunch of Crusaders. There's too many. There's too many names. So I'm just going to simplify it a little bit. The Crusaders you need to know about are Bohemond of Toronto, not Canada, but Italy, and then his nephew, Tancred, and Godfrey de Bouillon, and Baldwin de Bologna. Baldwin and Godfrey are both from northern France. They weren't actually Normans, but they had definitely sided with the Normans. Their father, Eustace II, in fact, was with William the Conqueror in 1066 when the Normans decided to also conquer England. The Normans were very busy people. Oh, let's go to Spain. You know what? I southern it. Anatolia. England. In other words, long after the Vikings started speaking French, they're still tearing up the planet. They're on this permanent, multi-century rampage.

And it wasn't enough for them that they had captured England already twice. They wanted it a third time. They're like, this is good real estate. We want it back. And they got it. And so when Godfrey and Baldwin go on this crusade, they're not actually Normans, but they're part of the Norman sphere. So in a way, the top four of the five most important Crusaders are Normans. The fifth guy is a guy named Raimond. He's Raimond of Toulouse, also known as Raimond Saint-Gilles. He was Raimond the Fourth of Toulouse. And they show up. And Alexius, there's also Hugh de Vermandois. There's a few other guys. But I just want you to know those five. They show up at Constantinople. And they swear an oath of fealty. Well, not Tancred. He refuses. He wants nothing to do with this. And what they promise is that all the land they capture will be handed to Alexius Comnenus, the Roman emperor. And of course, they're lying through their teeth. They have no intention whatsoever of handing anything over. Their goal is to go in there, carve off land, and make their own little personal fiefdoms. They cross over the Bosporus with the Roman navy. It's 1097. Khalid Arslan isn't there to greet them. He's in southern Turkey fighting another Turk. And the reason is that Turk was trying to capture a city from an Armenian, Malatya. And Khalid Arslan was worried if Danishmen captured Malatya, it would put his position, it would weaken his position. So even though he's got this crusader threat on the west, he's so focused on his rivals that he's actually fighting them. He turns around when he realizes the crusaders have landed. He goes as fast as he can. By the time he gets there, Nicaea has already fallen. He convinces other Turks in the area to fight alongside him. They fight the crusaders at Doraleum. And they're defeated. And Khalid Arslan has to withdraw. And they just watch as the crusader army passes. The crusader army then goes through Armenia. So when the Roman Empire lost Anatolia, a piece of the Roman Empire broke away and didn't get captured by the Muslims and remained its own separate thing. It was oftentimes called Lesser Armenia. It was a little Armenian kingdom on what is today the southern coast of Turkey. And so the crusaders arrived there. Tancred was the kind of guy who would look at a situation and he would size it up real quick. He decides to basically conquer it. And he just goes and grabs all the strategic points in Lesser Armenia. And in the process, he's running into Baldwin. Baldwin has the same idea, but he's a little slower. So he keeps arriving after Tancred has done this. And the problem then is Baldwin has the bigger army. So he shows up and Tancred has a problem. Do I fight my fellow crusader, who's basically telling me he's taking my thing from me, or do I walk away? So the first time he walks away, the second time he fights. The crusaders have barely started the crusade and they're already fighting each other. Not many people die for the record. I want to say it was like two guys died and a few dozen are wounded. And then they call off the fight and they negotiate and they make a deal. But still, you can see there's already problems. They get over the mountains, the Tarsus Mountains, and they arrive at Antioch. Antioch is the first prize. So Antioch had only just been captured by the Muslims in 1084. So by the time that the crusaders have arrived, it's 1098. They set up a siege. But Baldwin decides, ah, not interested. And he takes off to the east and he goes to a city called Edessa and he puts Edessa under, he tries to capture Edessa. He doesn't put it under siege. He tries to capture Edessa. And Edessa was ruled by Armenians. And so Baldwin goes to the Armenians and he starts working out a deal with them. The leader of the Armenians in Edessa was a guy named Thoros. And Baldwin talks Thoros into adopting him and then letting him marry Thoros' daughter so that he will become now the heir to Edessa. And Thoros goes, okay. Well, Armenian culture was that when you, presumably, one of the chroniclers says this.

I'm not sure it's actually true. That's one of the problems you always have when you're reading historical accounts. You're always like, mm, did that really happen? According to the chronicler, Armenian culture was when you got adopted, your adoptive father and mother wore a really big gown and then you would take off your top, you'd have pants on, and then you would crawl under the gown, but they're completely naked under, and you hug them. Anyway, so apparently that's what Baldwin did with Thoros and his wife. And then he waited around for a while until a mob grabbed Thoros and his wife and hanged them. And that's the birth of the first crusader state. We now have the county of Edessa. Baldwin is the first crusader lord to rule a chunk of territory. I think it was May 1098. In the meantime, the siege in Antioch is still going on. Bohemond is the guy who wants Antioch for himself, but so does Raimond. So there's now two crusaders both pushing for it, but the problem is they still gotta capture it first. They haven't captured it. The guy who was the ruler of Antioch was a guy named Yarhisian. And Yarhisian starts putting out feelers to see if he can get help to break this, the crusader siege. And there's two guys nearby. There's the guy who's running Damascus, because even though they're part of the Seljuk Empire, the Seljuk Empire is already coming apart at the seams. The Seljuk warlords don't like each other. They don't cooperate. They see each other as rivals. They're constantly backstabbing each other. And the guy in charge of Damascus is a guy named Dukak. And Dukak's brother, Ridwan, is the guy in charge of Aleppo. They hate each other's guts. They see each other as rivals. So Yarhisian sends for help from Dukak. Dukak takes an army, and he has to go past Aleppo, right? And he's coming up past Aleppo. He gets to line of sight of the crusader army. He panics. He turns around, and he heads back to Damascus. So Yarhisian is like, oh, what do I do? I guess I have to talk to Ridwan. But he doesn't want anything to do with Ridwan, because Ridwan has a group of allies that he didn't like. The Hashishans. The Hashishans were Shia who decided they didn't like the direction Islam was going in. Sunnis were systematically winning. The Seljuks were Sunnis. And the Seljuks had replaced the Buyids, who were Shia, and had been defeating the Fatimids, not replace them. The Fatimids were also Shia. And so there is this guy, Hassan al-Sabah, who decides he wants to take a different approach to fight for the Shia cause. And that different approach is he's going to get into political intrigue, spying, and assassinating people. And Hashishan is where we get the word assassin from. Now, whether or not they used Hashish, we don't really know. That could have been the chroniclers trying to make a story up. In any case, Hassan al-Sabah's followers were total fanatics. And Ridwan, the ruler of Aleppo, was totally into them. And they were friends. And they were working together. And so this scares Hashishan. So he doesn't really want anything to do with this. He asks Ridwan to send an army. And Ridwan does pretty much the same thing Dukak does. And nothing comes of it. So Hashishan realizes he's running out of food. He's running out of time. But so are the crusaders. The crusaders are literally starving to death. They've been traveling for months. It's a year now. And they're running out of supplies. And they've been slaughtering their horses along the way. For food purposes, they're down to like 800 horses. And probably half the crusader army is already gone by this point. Some of them died. Some of them got sick. Some of them broke a leg. Some of them just were like, you know what? I don't need this. And they turned around and they headed home. So now, you can see on the inside, Antioch is desperate because he's trying to figure out how he's going to get through this. And the crusaders like Bohemond and Rahamund are trying to figure out how they're going to get in the walls.

And at that point, another guy jumps into the story. And the other guy is the ruler of Mosul, Karbuka. Karbuka, this Yahishan convinces Karbuka to come with an army. But Karbuka has to pass Edessa on the way. And he's looking at Edessa. And he goes, this Baldwin has it. I want it. And so he stops his army. For three weeks, he parks it outside of Edessa. And then he decides he can't take it. And so he abandons the siege. And he heads to Antioch. But by the time he gets to Antioch, his generals are working against him. And so there's all this intrigue going on before he even gets to Antioch. But even though he's still heading to Antioch, it's kind of too late. Because in the meantime, because he took so long, because he added those three weeks, there was a guy named Firuz. Firuz was accused of dealing on the black market even though he knew and was a friend of Yahishan. And so he gets charged a heavy fine. He's so furious about this that he decides to betray his own people. Firuz tells the crusaders, I'm going to let you in to the city. The crusaders are like, why would we believe you? This is probably a trap. He goes, I'm going to give you my son. If it's a trap, kill my son. Crusaders are like, really? OK. Why are you doing this? He goes, I want land, gold, and vengeance. They go, OK. We can give you all three of those. And so in the night, he had access to a window that looked out over the walls. And he just dropped a really long rope down. And the crusaders came up the rope one at a time till there were about 500 guys inside the city. And they began fighting for the gate. Yahishan hears the sound. He panics. He jumps on a horse. And he rides off. He leaves his son and wife and family behind. He just takes off. He doesn't even assess the situation. He just figures, it's over. I'm out of here. He rides for days. He finally collapses from riding. His entourage try to put him back on the horse. They can't get him back on the horse. He's having a depression bout or something. He just lays on the side of the road. A peasant walks by, recognizes who he is, and cuts his head off and takes it to the crusaders and gets a reward. In the meantime, Yahishan's son, Shams al-Daula, son of the state, sun as in the thing in the sky, not child. Shams al-Daula, isn't that a cool name? Who would name their kid that? Anyway, Shams is beautiful, but of the state? Anyway, he's got the citadel, and he's holding on to it. He's like, OK, they've got the city. But he's also watching what the crusaders are doing in the city. They're not kind conquerors. They're not walking through and going, oh, hi, everybody. How's it going? They are murdering everybody. They're just going through the streets, slaughtering the inhabitants of Antioch. They're killing the men. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the poor. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the women. They're killing the babies. They're leaving nobody. And Shams is up there in the citadel going, what? Who are these people? Why are they doing this? Why wouldn't you want the city intact, somebody to tax, somebody to work for you? Why are you slaughtering the city? And there's nothing you can do about it except resist and hold on to the citadel. That's when Karbuka's army shows up. Too late. Shams actually sneaks out of the city to go meet with him to try and coordinate what's going to happen next. How are they going to fight for the city? Because he hasn't given up. Karbuka fires him on the spot. He goes, you're done. You're not going back to the citadel. He then sets up his army to fight. But the princes who are with him fear, Dukak and Ridwan, that if he succeeds, he will then be able to establish authority over Aleppo and Damascus. And so they actually pull off the field and start heading home. And when the rest of his army sees this, they lose heart. The crusaders see what's happening. They see them pulling away. So they come running out of the gate because the crusaders had just found the lance that speared Jesus.

The Romans check to see if he's dead by spearing him. Because if fluid comes out, it means he's drowned in his own fluids. Because that's the goal of crucifixion, is to drown you slowly. And they found the lance that did this. It's not probably, right? Probably what happened was a monk took a lance and buried it and said, I'm pretty sure it's somewhere around here. You guys should dig for it. They dig. They find it. They're like, it's a miracle. And they come charging out of the city towards Kabuka's army. His army's morale has collapsed. His morale has collapsed. They just turn and run away. And the crusaders don't pursue them because they think it must be a trap because they can't figure out why the larger army just ran away for no reason. And then they have their city. There's a brief struggle between Raimond and Bohemond. Bohemond wins. And Bohemond gets to keep Antioch. And then the rest of the crusaders go, we're not here for Antioch. We're here for Jerusalem. Let's keep going. Bohemond goes, I'm good. I got what I wanted. I just wanted one of the richest cities on the planet. Although it's not rich anymore because you just killed its inhabitants. Anyway, I don't understand. They start marching to Jerusalem. The next city they come upon is a town called Ma'ara. When they arrive at Ma'ara, the population fights as hard as they can. So it's soldiers and citizens holding onto the city as hard as they can. But eventually the crusaders get in and they capture the city. When they do, the crusaders murder all 20,000 inhabitants and eat them. So there's multiple sources that say this on both sides. It's always good to have both sides saying it. I know of three sources that are from the crusader side that say they ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. And they describe it in slightly different ways, but it's mostly the same. One of them says that they spit at the adults and the children and just roasted them over a fire. Another one says that they would cut chunks of flesh off of them and then roast the individual pieces over a fire. But it's pretty widespread agreement that the crusaders ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. But there's a lesson in this story that applies to today. So one of the things people will do who want to defend an indefensible position is they'll find something to nitpick. So one of the crusaders says that the people were tortured first, one of the crusader chronicles. But none of the Muslim chronicles say that the people were tortured first. And so what I've seen happen, even on BBC, is somebody will say, well, they may have eaten the people, but they didn't torture them. So first of all, I think if you slaughter 20,000 people, including the children in front of the parents, that's torture. But then second, I kind of don't care if that crusader's chronicles said there was torture and there wasn't or not, because I still think there was a horrible crime committed here. Why are you focusing on that one thing? So no Muslims are saying there was torture. Only one crusader was saying there was torture. Nobody's having an argument with you, dude. There's no, sure, there's no torture. They just killed them and ate them. The reason I'm bringing this up is you see this kind of nitpicking. Like, for example, with the Holocaust, Holocaust deniers, I have seen, focus on the number. So for the record, it wasn't 6 million Jews. It was probably 5.1 to 5.4. 6 million is a slight exaggeration. It's not a big exaggeration, but it's a slight exaggeration. So the Holocaust deniers would focus on the number. Well, it wasn't 6 million. If you just take the 5.1, you took away their ability to do this. And now you can, well, how about the 5.1? And then there's nowhere they can go, because that's the number. The 5.4 is also a number, possibly. But just go with the low. 5.1 is already a horrific, nightmarish, hellish, evil. It doesn't have to be 6. You see what I'm saying? It doesn't have to have been torture. We're good with it just being cannibalism.

So be careful when you're arguing, when you're dealing with people. What is that called? I feel like it's distraction. It's not gaslighting. It's a little different thing. It's like, yeah, but what about? Anyway, the Crusaders then approached Tarabulus, Tripoli. It was one of the wealthiest cities on the planet at the time. So was Antioch, by the way, but not anymore. Tarabulus had a library in it with 100,000 books. It was ruled by a qadi, as opposed to a guy who took the title of maybe king or something. It was ruled by a guy who had the title, basically, judge, which is kind of cool. And the city was rich. It had these big walls around it. The Crusaders set up a siege. There was no point. There was no way they were getting in. So they bypass it. And then they decide, you know what? Let's just keep bypassing. We have Antioch. We have Edessa. We have Ma'ara. Let's just go straight to Jerusalem. Why are we capturing anything else? So they bypass Beirut. They bypass Arsuf, Acre. They just don't deal with any of it. Sur, Fayda, they go straight to Jerusalem. When they get there, they immediately attack it. They don't have any ladders. They don't have any siege equipment. This city has a wall on it. It has a citadel. So the Crusaders just go like a mob, charging up to the thing. And they're like banging on. And the defenders are pouring oil on them, shooting them with arrows, going, they can't get in here. Why are they doing this? And hundreds of them are wounded and killed for no effect. So then the Crusaders set up a siege. The problem is that Jerusalem is brilliantly designed to not be siegeable. So all the sprigs are inside the wall. So the area around it is arid. So the army stuck trying to besiege this thing basically has to run a water line to the Jordan River and by bucket bring the water to the army. That's a tough thing to do. But that's what they're going to do. And they're praying. They're hoping that God will intercede and give them a break. And it may not have been God, but it was the Genovese. The Genovese show up with some English volunteers by ship. And the Genovese brought the material needed to build siege equipment. They build the siege equipment, and they attack the city. So a little bit of, I'm going to bring in another actor, another player. So Egypt had been taken over by the Fatimids. The Fatimids were Shia who had started in North Africa. They took over Egypt. By the way, they found Cairo, 969. Cairo is just barely over 1,000 years old. It's such a baby for the Middle East, right? Middle Easters go, oh, you're 1,000? Oh, you're so young. You're so young. Your whole life is ahead of you. Of course, Cairo is a mega massive city. It's the sixth largest metropolitan area on the planet. There's only three metropolitan areas on the planet that aren't in Asia that are in the top 10. Cairo, Sao Paulo in Brazil, and Mexico City are the three that aren't in Asia. Everything else is Shanghai and Tokyo and Calcutta. You know what I mean? So the Fatimids are doing all right, but something really weird is happening. The Fatimids hated the Seljuks, but the Fatimids liked the Romans. They were allies. So when this whole crusade thing happened, in the mind of the Fatimids, who had just lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks a few years earlier, what's going to happen is the crusaders, who are technically in the service of the Roman Empire, are going to split that land. Syria will go to the Romans. Palestine will go to Egypt. That's what they're thinking is going to happen. So they decide, let's go grab Jerusalem from the Seljuks before the crusaders arrive to do our part in this alliance. They have an explicit alliance with Rome. This isn't like they're speculating. This is the deal that they've made with Alexios Komnenos. And so they send an army. They defeat the Seljuks. They capture Jerusalem. And then they send an envoy to meet with the crusaders. And the crusaders just keep coming. And the Egyptians are like, what are you doing?

No, no, you stay on that side. That's the deal. We're going to split this. And the crusaders just keep coming. And it becomes clear to the Fatimids, they're going to fight. They're allies. So they dig in. And that's when the siege equipment comes and the crusaders break in. And the Egyptian general in command of the defense of Jerusalem, Iftikhar, is looking at this going, how do I fight this now that the crusaders have a sectional wall? And so he retreats his men to the citadel. Once they're in the citadel, there's nothing he can do for the population of Jerusalem. All he can do is he can hold on. It's basically a thorn in their side. He's going to make it so that the crusaders can't control Jerusalem, but they can control parts of Jerusalem. And he won't control any of the merchant part of Jerusalem, the commerce part of Jerusalem. He'll just have a military piece. And eventually, he'll run out of supplies. And their goal is to fight to the death. There's no point. They saw what happened at Ma'ara, and they saw what happened at Antioch. They know who the crusaders are. They're supposed to be allies. They're being backstabbed. They get it. But the crusaders really want the city. And so they start negotiating. And the deal that they come up with, Raymond Saint-Gilles comes up with, is the following, that the Egyptians will leave in groups of five. They'll leave the citadel, and then they'll exit the city five at a time. That way, if the crusaders break their word, turn on them, they'll only kill those five dudes who are in the middle of leaving. And then the guys that are still in the citadel, they can just keep fighting. And anybody who escaped has already escaped. And that's the deal. So the first five go, and then another five, and another five. And you know the last five were like, oh, god, you know they're going to turn on us. But they don't. And the last five get away. And then the crusaders go over to the gate, and they close it. They go over to the Muslim quarter, and they just begin murdering everybody. They're just walking through the city, slaughtering person after person. Tancred, the guy that I talked about, with the strategic mind who kept running into trouble with Baldwin until Baldwin took Edessa, he can't take it. He's like, what are we doing? He runs over to a group of Muslims who were running. And he's like, whoa, whoa, I'm not going to kill you. He hands them his banner. And he says, if crusaders approach you, say you're with Tancred. And show them my banner, and they won't harm you. And they're, of course, grateful. And then he just sort of runs around the city trying to figure out what to loot and how to save people's lives. He hasn't given up the looting. Don't be naive about this. But he's also like, let's not just murder everybody. And he describes in his own memoir, later on coming upon that group of Muslims laying there dead on his bloody banner. The crusaders didn't even care. They're just like, you're with Tancred? A group of Muslims realize there's no surviving this. This is over. So they decide, let's go to the mosque. Let's die praying. And so they barricade themselves inside the mosques. The crusaders eventually smash the doors open. They slaughter everybody inside. They get buckets of water. They wash the blood out. They go to the top of the minaret. They break the crescent moon off, and they stick a cross on top. They say a prayer. Boom. Insta-church. Then they go to the Jewish quarter. Because see, Jerusalem was in four quarters. A Muslim quarter, two Christian quarters, and a Jewish quarter. Why are the crusaders here? So that Christians can own Jerusalem. Because clearly they could be there if they had half the city. Not interesting. So they go to the Jewish quarter. And the Jews know what's coming. It's not rocket science here. So they just start running to synagogues. They figure, you know, let's do like those Muslims did. We'll die in prayer. The crusaders believed that Jews were so horrible, so evil, you couldn't wash out the synagogue afterwards and turn it into a church.

So they just piled wood around the synagogues and burned them to the ground, burning the Jews inside alive. And then they go to the two Christian quarters. And of course, at this point, the Christian population is peeing itself. Because it's just watched half the city get exterminated. And they go, you have the true cross, where is it? And the Christians go, we're not telling you. You're savages. And the crusaders go, OK, we got you. And they start murdering the Christian clergy. They're like, who's a priest? Let's have your priest. And they just start slaughtering the priests. They're like, when we're done, we're going to do the deacons. And then we're going to start working on your families. Eventually, somebody tells them, here's the true cross. Please stop killing us. And they stop massacring the Christians as well. But then they turn to the Christians and go, remember that great schism in 1058? These Catholic priests are your new priests. Get used to it. We're not doing that anymore. Your orthodox ways are out. And they're like, yeah, whatever. And that's how the crusaders captured Jerusalem. Isn't that a heartwarming story? Is that too much sarcasm? At that point, the Egyptians are trying to figure out what to do. They send an army to Ascalon with the hope that they'll eventually be able to come back and fight to capture Jerusalem back. Godfrey is named the new ruler of Jerusalem. He does not take the title king. So he's just the ruler. We'll get to that later. He takes his army. He runs to Ascalon. And the Egyptians were in disarray. They weren't expecting this. And so they weren't set up properly. And he attacks them within their disarray. And a bunch of them fall back. They drop into the fortress. The rest of them escape. And the crusaders get another win. They don't capture Ascalon. But they definitely humiliate the Egyptian army and buy themselves some time. The Egyptians aren't done. Their leader is a guy named Al-Aftal Shahanshah. Now, Shahanshah is not Arabic. It's Persian. But Al-Aftal is. The best leader of leaders is his name. Dude, if you have that as your name, you need to get into politics. That's incredible. That's incredible. Anyway, so Al-Aftal is actually a slave. Isn't that weird? And he's actually Armenian. So the guy running the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt, it has a caliph, a khalifa. It has a Shia khalifa. The guy running it is actually an Armenian slave. There's an actual khalifa who's a Shia Arab. But the guy running it, the wazir, is an Armenian slave named the best leader of leaders. And he's like, we're not doing this. He sends an army. They attack Ramla. Godfrey is dead. Godfrey dies. We don't know why. There's one person says that he was killed in battle. Another person said he got sick. Another person said he was poisoned. Godfrey's dead. He was literally the ruler of Jerusalem for a year. He's replaced by Baldwin, the guy that captured Edessa. He comes down. It's his brother. So the chronicler said that when Baldwin received the news, he was very happy, but also a little sad that his brother had died. And he comes down, and he's crowned king. And that's the moment in the year 1100 that the kingdom of Jerusalem is officially going, because there's now a king. But Godfrey was at 1099 when they captured Jerusalem. He meets Al-Afdal at Ramla in 1101. And he defeats the Egyptian army. The Egyptian army withdraws. They come back the next year, because Al-Afdal is not going to give up easily. They attack Ramla. And this time, they beat the crusaders. The crusaders fall to Jaffa. And in the second battle at Jaffa, the crusaders win again. The Egyptians withdraw. They come back in 1105 to do it again. They attack Ramla. And they're defeated a third time. And the Egyptians give it a rest. They're like, OK, we're exhausted losing. In the meantime, something really critical happens for the purposes of how the crusades are going to unfold. And it's the Battle of Haran. So Haran used to be called Karhaye.

Karhaye is where the Romans fought the Persians for the first time in 53 BC. And the Romans were, I mean, just summarily defeated. It was a catastrophe. 26,000 Romans against 8,000 Persians. And the Persians maybe lost like 100, 150. And the Romans lost like 13,000 dead, 10,000 captured. So the crusaders are going to do another Karhaye, only the city's been renamed Haran. And the Muslim army comes out to meet it at Haran. It's southeast of Edessa. And the crusaders are defeated. They are beaten in the field. And in fact, one of the crusaders is captured. His name is Baldwin. But it's a different Baldwin. It's not the king of Jerusalem. It's his cousin. I think it's his cousin. And his cousin's name was Baldwin Borsk. That's what's in my, Borsk, I think is what it was. And he's become the count of Edessa when Baldwin becomes the king of Jerusalem. And so he goes into captivity. And he's stuck in captivity for four years. And while he's in captivity, Bohemond himself also gets captured. And he ends up in captivity. So there's two crusaders that are now out of the picture because they've been captured. And then Raimon decides he wants Terabolus. So Raimon was probably supposed to become the king. But for whatever reason, he decided he didn't want to be the king of Jerusalem. He wanted to be the king of Terabolus. So what he did was he set up a siege for Terabolus after they captured Jerusalem in 1102. And he's built a fortress north of Terabolus. And he's fighting day after day. The defenders of Tripoli come out late in 1104. They set his fortress on fire. Raimon himself is severely injured in the fire. He survives it but dies like three or four months later from his wounds. So the crusaders have now lost basically three, four of their top crusaders. Godfrey is dead. Raimon is dead. Bohemond is in captivity. Baldwin, spoiler alert, who will become Baldwin II, who will become the second king of Jerusalem, is in captivity. So that's a weird story, obviously. And so they're in trouble. By this point, most of the crusaders have actually gone home. In other words, if the Muslims had just attacked in an organized fashion at that moment, there was nothing to stop them from just taking it all back. But the Muslims are in such disarray. And each of these Turkish warlords, these Seljuk warlords, hates each other's guts so much they just won't cooperate together. It gets so weird that at some point, 1108, there's going to be a battle. Baldwin gets released. And Baldwin is going to make a deal with the ruler of Mosul. And he's going to field an army. So it's going to be a crusader army next to a Seljuk army. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight against each other. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight Tancred. Tancred ended up becoming the regent of Edessa while Baldwin was in prison. Tancred doesn't want to give it up. He doesn't want Baldwin to come back. Tancred goes and he gets Ridwan, the guy from Aleppo. So there's a Tancred. The crusader has a Muslim ally. And they're next to each other in the field. And they're going to fight a battle against a Muslim crusader army. And by the way, they defeat Jawali and Baldwin. They have to escape. And Tancred basically keeps Edessa as a result. He's eventually talked into participating in the siege of Tarabulus. They're going to actually try and take it once and for all. And when he does that, he reconciles with Baldwin. But here we are. It's 1108. The crusaders just captured Jerusalem nine years earlier. And there's a battle where there's Muslims and crusaders on both sides fighting each other. Like, it's already gone sideways in every way you can imagine. And that's the first part of the Crusades. Having said that, there's so much more to this story, which is what I warned you from the beginning. Like, I am not going to get through the Crusades. I literally got you to 1108. By the way, my goal was 1125. But I think I'm basically out of time. So I'm surrendering and accepting I'm not going to get to my goal.

But to put things in perspective, the second crusade is 1145. The kingdom of Jerusalem is going to go down in a ball of flames. In case you didn't know that, I hope I didn't spoil this for you. But in 1187, after the Battle of Hattin. So then the third crusade is after that. And then there's a fourth crusade in 1202. And so in other words, the Crusades are just going to keep going for a while. And they actually don't end by most people's. The usual number we use is 1291. So it's 195 years. I've just covered nine of it. Well, 12 if you include the, well, even more. 13 if you include the peasant crusade. By the way, there's supposedly a children crusade in this. It's a lot of fun. The Crusades were great. I'm going to tell you the children crusade. I'm going to let you go. It happens later. So this is out of time sequence. But it's just too fun since I mentioned it. A group of children think if they go and just show up in Jerusalem, the Muslims will give it back. Because this is after the Battle of Hattin. So they don't, children obviously walking from France to Palestine is a little tricky. So what they do is they walk to Venice. And they show up. And they ask, will you, the Venetian Navy, just take us? And the Venetians go, yeah, of course. It would be our sacred duty to take you. And the children are never heard from again. They were sold into slavery. The Venetians just put them on the ships, took them to slave markets, and just. Isn't that just capitalism? I'm pretty sure that's just capitalism. All right. Thank you for your time. And if you want to come see my show and tell, I'll stick around to let you do that. And actually, you know what? I'll field a question. And then I'll let you go. How about that? I always forget to do that. I actually don't always. No? No questions? OK, good. We're done.

I have some stuff I want to do before I jump in, and I also want to talk about what I'm going to do when I jump in so that it's not a complete surprise. So one of the things I want to do, I have a lot of trouble with, which is it's self-promotion. So I'm going to pass these around, these are just bookmarks. It's advertising my novel, and I brought a copy of my novel. So I have a novel, and it's The Blood Throne of Caria, and the reason I'm pushing it, and it makes me feel dirty doing this, so I'm probably just off a little bit, is because I'm ramping up to try and put out another novel, and if I can get a little bump in sales before that happens, it helps me. So if you like that kind of stuff, get my novel. That kind of stuff is historical fiction. I'm particularly obsessed with basically everything from Iran to Italy. That's like my zone where I obsess about. This is set in the 6th century, 5th century, 5th century B.C. in the southwest corner of Turkey. And it's about a real person, so it's historical fiction, but she doesn't have, her name is Artemisia, she doesn't have a lot of, how should we say this, there's a lot of attacks done on her by historians, and so my goal in writing this novel was to figure out what was true and what was a lie, and then correct the lie. But I can't claim it's the truth because it's speculation on my part, so hence historical fiction. Somebody's going to ask at some point what they should read. This is a fun way to start, it's The Crusades Through Arab Eyes, wouldn't that be a novel idea, by Amin Malouf. It's an old book, it's 1985 if I remember correctly, but there, now I've done that part. I also want to dedicate this talk to a group of people, so it's a small list, but I just want to do this. Omar, Saeed, Iman, Iman, Iman, and then Hadi, I'm probably forgetting somebody else I intended. You know what, I'm going to throw Jayden into the mix, he'll be like, oh my god, I can't believe you threw my name in there. I actually have a, I was just gifted a piece of rock from Palestine from the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and so I'm probably going to hold on to it the entire talk because, well, my talk is going to take place in Palestine mostly, so this is kind of a strange thing to have right now. Also, let's see, what did I do with it, I probably already lost it. I brought show and tell, but it won't work because the camera is too small and you're sitting too far away. I actually brought coins from the time period, so I will, after the talk, you can come up and look at it, and then what I'll do is we'll put, for the people who are watching this on video, I'll just put pictures up on it, but just to give you an idea of what I have, this is a coin from William II. It's after the period I'm talking about today because I'm not going to get to him. William II was the king of Sicily. The year in my head is 1153, but who knows. Anyway, the reason I brought it was because I am going to talk about the Normans, and I'm going to talk about Sicily a little bit for background purposes, and I kind of wanted to stick this in your head a little bit. On one side, the coin is written in Latin. On the other side, it's written in Arabic because the Normans took Sicily from the Arabs, and so they just made it so that they were a bilingual society. This, let me see, hold on, I'll do this one here. This coin is going to matter because this is Romanus IV, the Roman emperor. I'm going to talk about him in a little bit of detail, just briefly, because he's going to set things in motion that make the rest of the story possible, and then when you look at the coin, you'll see that the quality of the coin dramatically falls when you get to Alexios Komnenos. Alexios Komnenos becomes the Roman emperor just like 11 years later, and the quality of the coin is terrible compared to this one, so it makes you realize how far into decline the Romans had fallen. One of the things I'm going to do is I'm going to do a little bit of background, and in the process of doing the background talk, I'm going to bring up the birth of the Arab Empire.

We don't know what year this coin was minted because it doesn't have a year on it. It's actually a counterfeit coin. The Arabs, when they made their empire, needed coins, and they went and stole a Roman mint, and they began minting coins, Roman coins, so it has Latin letters on the back. It has three Roman emperors, well, an emperor and his two sons on the front. They're holding in one hand a cross, and in the other hand a globus cruciger with a cross sticking out of it, so there's literally six crosses on this coin, and this is the Arab Empire, one of the Arab Empire's first ever coins. It was minted during the Rashadin period. We don't know a date, so I can't tell you who, but most likely it would have been Uthman ibn Affan or the Khalifa Ali ibn Abi Talib. It's probably not one of the earlier two, and then this coin is Muawiyah I. He did the same thing. It's a Roman emperor with two crosses in his hand, and on the back, Latin letters, and one of the reasons why I wanted to sink that into your heads is to also show how the boundary between things is really blurry, right? We're a society of people who want to put everything into categories, including ourselves. We can't wait to label ourselves, and we keep breaking it down further and further, and the reality is these categories are all imaginary and made up. Nobody is that easy to categorize, you know what I mean, let alone whole societies, especially societies where everything is blurred together. I probably have said Arabic words, for example, that are English in this. I wasn't paying attention, but you know, at one point I might say the word nadir or zenith or zero, and then by contrast, Arabic is filled with Latin words. For example, the word faloos, the word for money, comes from pholos. It literally was, one of those coins was a pholos that I was holding up, and so the word is actually Latin. It's not Arabic. It's just the Arabs used the Latin word. Cres, the word for cherries, comes from crassinus, which is the Latin word for cherry, and it can go on and on because everything is stuck together. All right, so as Eric Deggans would say, I'm going to do a bunch of table setting. Eric Deggans is a TV critic that I listen to on NPR, and he recently complained about too much table setting, but I don't know how to not do table setting, and the reason I have to do the table setting is if I just jump into the Crusades and start talking about it, it'll be entertaining because there's a lot of violence. Like, if you enjoy People Massacred, and I know you do because I watch the same movies you do, then this is a great story because it is gory, but it's kind of helpful to know why it happened, and how did we even get into the situation where it was possible. So I can't skip that. Having said that, I have no intention and no belief that I can, even if I wanted to, cover the entire Crusades. So in other words, this is part one. You're just setting this up now. I will try to do the entire Crusades, but I'm betting I'm going to have to do four parts. One of the reasons I don't know is, some of you have figured this out about me, I don't write my lectures out, so I actually don't know what I'm going to say until it starts happening, and so as a result, I don't know how the timing of this is going to land, so it'll be fun. I'm exploring this with you, and we'll see where it goes. It'll probably be a train wreck, and people will hate it, but it'll be fun for me anyway, and that's the important thing. All right, so, to do this, I need to introduce some actors. The first actor I want to introduce is probably the most important actor in the story, and it's the Arabs. And the reason they're the most important, obviously, is because the Crusaders are going to invade the Arab world to fulfill their goal of making a kingdom of Jerusalem. So, the Arabs created an empire that most people don't refer to, don't talk about, that's basically been deleted from history. It's the Arab empire, although I've frequently heard it referred to as the Muslim empire.

The reason you need to not do that and call it the Arab empire is the Arab empire was created by Arabs, like the Roman empire was created by Romans. We don't call it the pagan empire, and when it becomes Christian, we don't call it the Christian empire, right? When it becomes Japanese, we don't call them the Shinto Buddhist empire, you know what I mean? When Alexander the Great made his empire, we don't call it the pagan empire. So, why would we do this in this one particular case? And what I'm going to pose to you is the reason we usually don't even name it, and if we do, we sometimes call it the Muslim empire, is because of anti-Arab hate. We have that running through the core of our society, the core of our civilization, and one of the reasons is because of the events that led to the Crusades and the Crusades themselves. In other words, by doing anti-Arab hate, you're perpetuating this old wound. It's time to let it go. Although, by the time we're done tonight, you'll be like, oh my gosh, what's that about? So, it'll be good. The Arabs began making their empire, and by empire, I mean it in the true sense of the word empire. To be clear, a state that rules multiple countries and nations. That's all you need to be to be an empire. Having said that, you could claim that in the United Kingdom today, what's left of the great empire is still an empire, because Great Britain is Wales, England, and Scotland. That's three countries. And then, throw in Northern Ireland, Gibraltar, Bermuda, and the Falkland Islands and Malvinas, and you end up with multiple countries, right? Or at least pieces of multiple countries. So, they began making their empire in 633, when the first Khalifa, Abu Bakr, launches his armies into the Persian and Roman Empires simultaneously, in what should have been a completely insane, impossible, can't-be-done event. And it's not only done, but by 711, the Arab Empire became the largest empire on the planet to that date. There have been larger empires since, but there had never been a larger empire before this. It stretched, by 711, from Spain to Pakistan. It went all the way into Central Asia. So, if you can conjure a map of the Roman Empire, it owned about 60% of the Roman Empire. Conjure a map of the Persian Empire, it owned 100% of the Persian Empire. And it went into Central Asia, and it went into India. Fine? For those of you, because I just said Pakistan, for those of you who don't know, the British cruelly and sadistically cut Pakistan out of India. Pakistan is India. It's just, you know how the Brits are. It's divide and conquer, wreck, destroy, ruin. India is named after the Indus River, which is 100% in Pakistan. It's just cruel. You know what I mean? Anyway, so, this Arab Empire, by the way, when it was born, it had a tiny Muslim population. But by 711, it had a few more Muslims. It was maybe 5-10% of the population was Muslim. The empire itself was majority Christian, 60% Christian. In fact, probably somewhere around 60% of the world's entire Christian population was in the Arab Empire. Isn't that hard to comprehend? The majority of the world's Christians lived in the Arab Empire, an empire that was majority Christian. In 711. So, the empire has been around that, right? From 633 to 711, it's already been around for a few decades. It's not like it was just born. One of the reasons why Muslims are such a small percentage of the population is they didn't convert by the sword. There was no compulsion to become Muslim. At first, what the Muslim conquerors did was they said, if you're Christian or Jewish, you worship the book. Therefore, you have a pathway to heaven. So, you have to be treated like a full human. But then, as they kept conquering, they kept running into other religions. And they just kept extending it. So, the Zoroastrians, okay, yeah, why not? And, right, centuries later, by the time they're in India proper, they're like, yeah, Hindus too, it's all good. We're going to make this work. Right?

That was what kept happening. By the way, the Arab Empire in 711 was probably about five, ten percent Buddhist, just to mess with you. Afghanistan had a giant Buddhist population. So, it seems counterintuitive, but there it is. That empire gets into a conversation with itself. And the conversation it has with itself stems from a problem that they had. The Arabs had never ruled themselves, let alone ruled an empire, right? Until this moment. 633, the year they launched the empire, is the year the Arabs, for the first time in history, ruled the entire Arabian Peninsula. So, they don't even catch their breath. They conquer the Arabian Peninsula, put it under a single state, and then they just go, they just keep going. Next thing you know, they've conquered the Persian Empire, and they've conquered the majority of the Roman Empire, and they're in France, trying to conquer France. What was the Battle of Tours? 732 is in my head, I hope that's not wrong. So, this empire has a problem. Arabs don't know how to run an empire. They've never run an empire before. Normally, conquerors are arrogant, and they're cruel, and they're sadistic. Like, take the Romans. So, I'm part Italian. So, for those of you that like being mean to Italians, a little bit, but it's okay. Gaius Julius Caesar, the guy you incorrectly called Julius Caesar, when he conquered Gaul, there were three million people living in Gaul. When he left, there was one million people living in Gaul. He murdered one million, he enslaved one million, and then he looked at the remaining million and went, welcome to the Republic. By the way, we'd like for you to worship our gods. Let's have your taxes now. Oh, and we're going to steal your technology. That's what conquerors often did, right? The Arabs, on the other hand, were humble about this, and they told the Romans and the Persians they had conquered, we don't know what we're doing, we don't know how to do this. We want to just leave you where you are. You're a bureaucrat, you're running this province, don't stop, and then we'll watch you. Maybe we'll figure it out, but in a few generations, hopefully we'll have this sorted out. In the meantime, I'm going to counterfeit this money over here. It's got crosses on it, but that's okay. I'm okay with that. I like Jesus. And that was kind of their conversation. So, the reason that matters is Muawiyah, I showed you the coin. Muawiyah I moves the capital after a civil war that lasts five years, that ends in 661. He moves the capital to Damascus from Medina. When he puts the capital in Damascus, he puts it in a former Roman city. And that matters, because it meant that the bureaucrats around Muawiyah are shaping the policies he's creating, and it orients the Arabs in the Arab empire west. It orients them towards the Romans. And in fact, he's going to lay siege to Constantinople. He won't capture it. But then a subsequent Arab the next century is going to do it again, and they'll fail a second time. Had they captured Constantinople on either of those two, they would have taken out the Romans too, because they had already conquered the Persians. Yazdegerd III was the last Persian emperor. He's gone. Persians are done. But the Romans are still hanging on. For the record, what saved the Romans was the emperor put out a contest. He said, anybody who can invent something that can save us, I will give you a sum of money. A Syrian refugee, isn't that cool? Isn't that weird, a refugee? I thought we were supposed to put them in cages. Anyway, a Syrian refugee invented a flamethrower. So what happened was the Roman Navy had a chain blocking the vulnerable north end of Constantinople. They had a chain that went across, so the Arab Navy couldn't get through it. And the Roman Navy was hiding behind the chain, this big chain. And the Romans pulled up the chain, and the Roman Navy started coming out. The Arabs are like, why are they coming? We'll just sink them. This is suicide. And the Romans came right up on them.

And the Arabs had no idea they had flamethrowers. And they just opened up and set the Arab fleet on fire. And that's how they saved Constantinople. Anyway, that's why you should never turn away Syrian refugees. That is the rule on that one. Or is the rule you should make them. Sorry, I went to a dark place. All right, so in 750, there's a coup d'etat. The Abbasids overthrow the Umayyads. And they move the capital to a brand new city that they've just built on a village. The village is called Baghdad. It's a Persian village. And they move the capital to this city. They rename it Medina Tassalam, the City of Peace. And they build this amazing fortress system. It's a two-layer fortress system. It's incredible. The city should be impossible to capture. And science and commerce and philosophy pour into the city. Art pours into the city. And the city grows really fast and becomes a major city really quickly. But it's in Iraq, which was Persian, not necessarily ethnically, by the way. There was a huge Arab population in Syria during Roman period and a huge Arab population in Iraq already. What I mean is it was the Persian Empire. But there were also a lot of Persians as well because they were intermingled. Because you've got to remember, this is a pre-nationalistic society. It's before people went, oh, my DNA is better than DNA by virtue of my race or by virtue of my nation. Back then it was, I was born in this city and that makes me better than you. It was city discrimination, which is fun. We have that a little bit. Like whenever a Houstonian walks up to you, you know he's from. Anyway, so this means that the conversation changes. Because now it's got a Persian orientation because the Abbasids are surrounded by Persian bureaucrats. And those Persian bureaucrats have two agendas. One, to shift the attention of the Arab Empire east. And two, to destroy it. That is their goal. They are going to break this thing. The reason is, is because most of the countries that the Arabs conquered adapted and began to speak Arabic. Or at least there was a large population slowly starting to speak Arabic. Like Arabic probably didn't become the major language in Egypt until about 900 AD. But there was already a population of people speaking Arabic for commercial purposes and for political purposes by this point. The Persians weren't learning Arabic. They were holding onto their identity and their language. They had converted to Islam, but they weren't going to convert to being Arab. So right, ethnically Egyptians aren't actually Arab. But culturally and linguistically, they're 100% Arab. I keep running into conversations with people like, well, Egyptians aren't real Arabs. Oh, do they still speak ancient Egyptian? I miss that. I mean, they do. If you go to a Coptic church and listen to the liturgy, they do it in Coptic. Coptic is ancient Egyptian. Ancient Egyptian is as alive in Egypt as Latin is in Italy. You can hear it. It's not dead dead. It's just mostly dead. Right? And so what it means to be Arab is really more of a linguistic thing than it is an ethnic thing. It's not a DNA thing. It's do you speak Arabic? Well, the Persians rejected that. They refused. They resisted. And so little by little, they start to pick at the Arab empire from within, because they're the bureaucrats running it now. And pieces of the Arab empire start to come off. If I remember correctly, the first piece comes off, well, the first piece comes off in 756. Spain. One of the Umayyads escaped the Abbasids. They massacred the Umayyads. They tried to kill all of them so there would be no rivals out there causing them problems. Well, one of them got away. He snuck through Egypt. He went across North Africa. He went to Spain. And in 756, six years after the Abbasid revolt, he pulls Spain out of the empire. And so the empire is already starting to come apart in 756. I think 727 is the next time a major piece comes out. And that's over in Persia. And little by little, the Arab empire starts to disintegrate.

Eventually, it will lose all of North Africa and Persia. And as it's shrinking, the khalifa, the system where you had a person who was a religious and a political authority, is starting to become symbolic. And they're being replaced by wazirs. They're being placed by ministers. And so there's actually now a secular leader who's running the show. And the khalifa is becoming a symbolic leader who's mostly just confined to a palace in Baghdad and has no meaningful role other than to walk around the garden looking pretty. And by the time that happens, it also means that the person who has the best position symbolically to unify people has no political power, which is bad if you're trying to hold things together. I can't give you an exact date when the Arab empire stops functioning. But it's pretty finished by 900. I've seen the year 833 used as well. I think you can have an argument about when that's happened. By the time the Buyids are running Baghdad, it's over. There's no two ways about it. The Buyids were Persians who had broken out Iraq and a huge chunk of Iran and were ruling it on their own. And of course, the reason that matters now is if there is going to be a European invasion down the road, there isn't an empire to stop it. Well, there will be, because I'm going to have to introduce another actor, and it's the Seljuks. In 1037, a group of Turkish warriors begin to conquer the Middle East. And they create an empire to replace the Arab empire. And that empire is the Seljuk empire. So for the record, Turks are from Central Asia. They are in the same cultural linguistic group as Mongolians, Koreans, and the Japanese. I'm going to let you sit on that one for a moment. I take that in. Japanese, Koreans, Mongolians, and Turks are the same cultural linguistic group. Do this as an exercise. Find a Turk and stand up next to a Korean and have the Koreans start speaking Korean and have the Turks start speaking Turkish. It is crazy cool. It is very, very super cool. You should totally do this experiment. You can. They exist here in Austin. Just start looking for them. The Turks are starting to move into the Middle East for multiple reasons, one of them being they're serving as mercenaries. Another one is they're just looking for land to inhabit. It's a migration. There are immigrants coming in. And by 1037, they're politically in a position where they start conquering. And they end up conquering a huge chunk of the Asian part that the Arab empire had. I'm making this number up because I never measured it. But they probably ended up with about 30% of the Arab empire, maybe a little bit more. Maybe a third of the Arab empire. Let me introduce another actor, the Roman Empire. So I've said this before in lectures. So people who have seen my previous lectures will probably be annoyed with me because I'm just repeating myself. But I have to a little bit because I'm going to assume that you haven't. And that way it makes sense. When I was a kid, when I was an adult, I was taught that the Roman Empire fell on September 4, 476 AD. This is one of my big pet peeves about the way we teach history. The Roman Empire did not fall on September 4, 476 AD. That's just a lie. There's nothing even remotely truthful about it. What happened on September 4 is Romulus Augustus, the Western Roman emperor, took off his purple robes, stuck it in a box with a note attached to the box that said, we don't need two emperors anymore. We just need one emperor. And he sent it to Emperor Zeno. Emperor Romulus Augustus was in Ravenna, Italy. That was the capital of the Western Roman Empire at that time. They had long since abandoned Rome. The city of Rome existed. It was largely empty, though. It had 1 and 1 half million people at its height. And at that point, there were 40,000 people. Can you imagine walking through the streets of a city that at one point had 1 and 1 half million people and there's only 40,000 people there? Talk about ghost town. What was that like?

And of course, most of those houses and buildings have collapsed, and they're in ruins. But still, that must have just been a trip. We were great ones. What happened to us? This is terrible. And then you look at the coins, and they were striking at the time. And you're like, dude, what happened to your artists? They all died, too? Find some artists. So what happened was the Roman Empire fell on May 29, 1453. So when you were a kid, probably this happened. It happened to me. People would go, we don't know why the Roman Empire fell. Maybe it was the gladiators. They stopped doing the gladiating like centuries earlier. So probably not. Maybe it was the orgies and the eating festivals. They also stopped doing some of that, too. I mean, they still had a little bit of that going. But not as much as they did during the Republic. That was the height of that. You know what I mean? That was the good old days. So that's probably not it. Lead pipes. If lead pipes was a problem, we're in trouble. I don't know if you know this, but we have lead pipes in the United States. All the urban centers have lead pipes, as Flint found out. So probably not the lead pipes, either. For the record, what happens is hard water calcifies the inside of the lead pipes, and then the lead is no longer a problem because there's basically a salt layer inside the pipe protecting you from the lead. But then your city council decides they don't have enough money. Why? Because we went through a tax-cutting frenzy because somebody went, taxes are evil. They pay for things like water. What do you mean taxes are evil? Roads. Where do you think roads come from? Schools. Schools are also taxes. Hospitals, scientific research, police departments, fire departments. It's not the Libertarian Ferry that delivers that stuff. That's taxes. Unless you're lucky and you had a bunch of oil, like Texas does. Anyway, but it's OK. We keep our electric grid functioning just as well as Egypt does. So that's amazing. It's fun living in a third world country again. You know what I mean? It's very familiar. I go to Mexico in the summer so I have electricity. Also, by the way, it's cooler. Push that through your brain. I still can't get over that. I'm very confused about that. So I've derailed myself. Why did I go down that path? So here's what happened. I was taught we don't know why the Romans collapsed. But we do know why the Romans collapsed. And the reason we know why the Romans collapsed is because I can actually tell you the exact day the Romans collapsed. I don't know what it's telling me. Actually, it's telling me you need to go. The Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453. The reason why the Romans collapsed on May 20, you thought I was kidding, the reason why the Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453, and I can tell you exactly why, is because an Ottoman army captured the last Roman capital, Constantinople. Constantinople was the last piece of Roman real estate. In other words, there's no mystery why the Romans fell apart, the Roman Empire fell apart. It fell apart because it was conquered. And we know the exact moment it was conquered. In other words, there's no reason to have doubt about the date that the Roman Empire fell. Here's what happened. There was a guy named Hieronymus Wulf. About a hundred years after the Roman Empire fell, and I want to say a hundred years, but that's probably wrong, somewhere around 1550, right? The Roman Empire fell 1453. He decided he was going to rewrite history on purpose and tell a really big lie on purpose. He had two goals. One, he wanted to divorce the Roman Empire from its ignominious defeat at the hands of the Muslims. The Roman Empire was a Christian empire. He was a Christian. He was a German. And he hated the idea that Muslims had conquered the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire had been defeated by Ottoman Turks. And so he decided he was going to move the date of the conquest of the Roman Empire to a hundred years earlier, lie to everybody, and people would accept the lie because it would divorce the end of the Roman Empire from the Muslims.

And then the second goal was, in 476, Odo Vakur, the German, declared himself the king of Italy. Now, to be clear, he left Italy in the Roman Empire. He didn't separate Italy from the Roman Empire. So Italy just became, instead of a set of provinces, it became one kingdom with Odo Vakur, the ruler, who sent taxes to Emperor Zeno and flew a Roman flag. It's weird, but it also means Italy is still in the Roman Empire. But because Odo Vakur was a German, then Hieronymus Wolf could say, the Germans took out the Roman Empire. But it's not true. It's a lie. It's a bald-faced lie. So by the time we get to the Crusades, there's a Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire is playing a major role. And the reason the Roman Empire is playing a major role is it's been in decline for a long time. When I say the Roman Empire fell in 1453, you have to remember that's after 2,200 years. The Romans aren't quite as long as the Egyptians in terms of the length of their history, right? When the Romans conquered Egypt in 31 BC, Egypt was a 4,500-year-old civilization, right? It's not quite on that scale, but it's really close. It's half that scale. And Rome had been in decline since the 200s. In other words, Rome had been on its way out for 13 centuries. So for more than half of the length of time that Rome had been around, it was struggling to survive. That's what you call tenacity, resilience. That's incredible. Who survives barely making it for that long? At one point, they actually do get conquered. And they manage to put themselves back together and reconstitute themselves and just keep going. They break up on multiple occasions. Zenobia is my favorite. There was a woman who led a rebellion in Syria, and she captured Syria, Turkey, Palestine, and Egypt, and she made her own little empire. They were too sexist to let a woman rule, so she made her six-year-old son the actual emperor. But she ruled, and his name was Wabalathus. Wabalathus. Isn't that a cool name? Anyway, and by the way, Palmyra was her capital. So sort of a strange twist, right? She was like in the middle of Syria, made her capital there. Don't worry, the Romans killed her. Something like that's not going to be allowed. And they put the empire back together, and then it fell apart. It was like an accordion. The Arabs come, tear them up. The Germans tear them up. It's a mess. The Huns tear them up. The Bulgarians tear them up. It's just wave after wave until they finally just go down once and for all in 1453. But by the time the story of the Crusades is happening, the Romans are desperately trying to hold on to what is today Turkey. I'm going to use Anatolia just because I think it makes it a little bit less confusing, at least in my brain. Anatolia was the name at the time. Turkey is the name today because it's the Turks' habit, right? They've named it after themselves. Another actor I want to introduce might sound strange. It's the Vikings. I'm going to tell you something really strange. The Vikings are one of the reasons why the Crusades happened. Isn't that weird? You're like, wait, why? Work with me here on this one because it's kind of strange. So the Vikings were Germans. They were the Germans who settled Scandinavia. Scandinavia was kind of like the worst piece of real estate in Europe at the time. Today, obviously, it's like heaven. But back then, it was the garbage piece that nobody wanted to go to. In other words, the people who became the Vikings, they never called themselves Viking. Viking is a term we've retroactively put on top of them, like the term Byzantine that Hieronymus Wolf came up with for the Roman Empire's last 1,000 years, 977 years for those of you who want it to be more precise. There's no such thing as a Byzantine Empire. The Vikings, I'm going to use the term Viking anyway, though. The Vikings got stuck with this piece of real estate where you really couldn't grow a crop. So pretty much all you could do was raise cattle and go fishing. And at some point, their population had reached a threshold.

They had sort of reached the carrying capacity of cheese rolls and dried fish. And when that happened, they had no choice but to start looking for alternatives. And they took two approaches, by the way. One approach the Vikings did was they set out to start trading. They thought, you know what? We can fix our problem if we can do trade, because we'll have the money to buy the food that we need. And the Eastern Vikings, the Swedes, got so into this, they actually started trying to figure out where they could go to. And they started reading their sagas. This is the 8th century. Not reading their sagas. They were oral histories. They were listening to their sagas. And the sagas told the Vikings that the place the Germans were from was Iran. By the way, Kermani-Iran, which is where we get the word German, because ga and ka, when languages change over time, are interchangeable. So Kerman, German. We say German because we pronounce it like a French person would. But a German says German, right? So if you're saying the study of Germanic studies, it's Germanismus, because they don't say it the way a French person would. So the sagas tell the Vikings you're originally from Persia. So the Swedes go, wow, that's an idea. Let's go. Let's see what we can find. And so what they would do is they would go to what is today Latvia. They would take their long ships up the Dvina River. They'd go as far inland as you could get, pretty close to the city of Rzhev. They would pull their ships out of the water, fully loaded, because they have to carry their supplies. They can't leave the supplies behind. So they would carry these fully loaded ships over land until they got to the Volga River. I mean, that's a pretty manly, you know what I mean? Like, they've got their armor and their weapons. And they're hauling these. I want to go backwards in time just to see this. You know there was a lot of grunting. And then they put the ship in the Volga River. And they sailed the Volga River all the way to the Caspian Sea. And they went down the Caspian Sea to the Persian coast. And they're like, hi. And the Arabs had just conquered Persia a couple of centuries earlier. And they're walking around Persia going, what is all this? You have modern agriculture and modern medicine. And you're doing philosophy. And you've invented zero. And you're doing algebra. And the Vikings are like, we don't even have a written language. We shouldn't have left. We could have had this. And they began trading. Now, to supplement their trading on that long trade route, they would also raid. And they would attack the Slavic populations along the way. And they would take some for slaves. And then they would sell them into the slave markets, make a little bit of extra koi. So maybe that. Full disclosure, I'm a quarter Swedish. So if there's a little bit too much admiration on my part, it's just ugly nationalism. The Western Vikings started raiding England. And then they started expanding where they raided. And before you knew it, they were just raiding all of northern and Western Europe. And in the process, they start to get some amazing victories. So you know, London Bridge is falling down, falling down. That's because it did. That's because my ancestors took out London Bridge. That song is based on a real event. Isn't that cool? I think it is. And so the Vikings actually end up conquering places like England. They get multiple kings of England. Cnut the Great, of course, the most famous. But there's also Svein Forkbeard. Isn't that a cool name? Svein Forkbeard. And they end up ruling this empire that stretches across Scandinavia and England. And they were doing all right for themselves. And they got their eyes on Paris. And they thought, you know what? Let's go take France. I don't know why not. We've got Latvia and Estonia and Finland and Ukraine, right? Because the Vikings, eventually the Ukrainian nobles couldn't figure out how to rule their lands. So they started hiring Viking mercenaries.

The group of Viking mercenaries they hired were the Rus, R-U-S. And the Rus eventually created Kievan Rus because they realized they were the only armed guys. And they didn't know why they were taking orders from anybody. And they just took over. And that's how Russia was founded. Isn't that crazy? Anyway, they almost got Paris. Long story short, they were on the island. They were battering down doors. They were scaling the walls. They almost got Paris. It was so close. And so after they failed to get Paris, the French came out. And they went, OK, that was too close. You almost got us. If you get a second shot, we don't think we're making it. So what do we do? We're not surrendering, surrendering. We're not giving you Paris. We're going to make you fight for it if you try to get it again. But we really don't want you to try again. We're going to meet you somewhere. And they make a deal with a guy named Rollo. And the deal is Northern France. They give Rollo Northern France. Now the Vikings, I told you, weren't called Vikings. They were called the Northmen, or depending on your language, Norsemen, or Nordmen, or Normans. And so the Vikings named Northern France after themselves. They called it Normandy. And they began ruling it. But they had a problem. And that was that the French peasants wouldn't learn German. They wouldn't learn to speak the dialects of German that the Vikings were speaking. They kept insisting on speaking French. And so the Norman nobility, Rollo, by the way, got Normandy in 911. The Norman nobility now has to learn French so that when they're abusing their peasants, the peasants understand the abuse. It doesn't help to shout at a peasant and then they don't understand you. You need them to understand. So they learn French. And what that does then is it sets us up for a really strange set of events. Somebody gets a great idea just a few decades later, 999, so 911 to 999, so 88 years later, to hire Norman mercenaries in southern Italy. And so Norman mercenaries start to travel from Northern France all the way to southern Italy. And they're being used by everybody. They're being used by the Romans, who are trying to hold on to southern Italy. They had it. They're losing it. They're trying to get it back. The Roman emperor at the time is a guy named Basil II. You want to laugh, but he was one of the greatest Roman emperors of the time period. And he went on a conquering spree and he starts carving up territory that the Romans had lost and he's putting it back in, including taking lands, Muslim lands. He actually brings the Roman Empire back to Syria and he captures Antioch and the northern end of Syria. The part of Syria that today is in Turkey is basically what he recaptured. So when the Ottoman Empire broke up, the Europeans showed up with a crayon and a napkin and they just began drawing borders. And you look at the border between Saudi Arabia and Jordan or Jordan and Iraq and you're like, why'd you do that? And they sneezed or something. Somebody got bumped and an extra wiggle line popped up. And they did that with Syria. They just chopped off the northern part and gave it to Turkey. So Basel II is re-carving the Roman Empire, but at the same time, there's all these forces pushing back and everybody's using Normans as mercenaries. That must have been awkward. You see your cousin on the other side. How much are you getting paid? And you fight for a little while. I'll pretend to kill you, OK? Don't swing at me. What eventually happens is those Normans go, why are we fighting for these other guys? And in 1030, the first Norman gets made a lord in southern Italy. And he slowly starts to conquer. And subsequent generations of Normans start to take pieces of southern Italy. And in 1061, the Normans are getting on ships and they're crossing over to Sicily. And they begin conquering Sicily. Sicily had been conquered by the Arabs two centuries earlier. The Normans also start getting hired by the Roman Empire in Anatolia, because they're being used to fight the Seljuks, who are coming west and fighting their way into Anatolia.

And so the Romans are using these Norman mercenaries in, I showed you the coin of Romanus IV. In 1071, Romanus IV has an army at a place called Manzikert. And they fight a battle against the Seljuks. And they're defeated. The Romans are defeated. The Normans take off after they were defeated. They just move out of the way. But the Romans get captured, including Romanus IV. He was taken. The Seljuks offered a ransom. The Romans are like, no, we don't ransom you. And they replaced him. The reason that mattered was the Norman commander, Russel de Baerl, decides he's going to do in Anatolia, in the middle of Turkey, by the way, Galatia. So right in the New Testament, Galatians, those are the letters that Paul writes to the Celts living in Anatolia. He decides he's going to carve out a little kingdom for himself in Galatia. And the Normans go on a conquering spree. And they make Ankara, Ankara, the capital of a Norman kingdom in the middle of Turkey. There are French-speaking Vikings ruling the middle of Turkey, which is historically populated by Celts. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. Historically populated by Celts, you know, kilt-wearing, bagpipe-playing Celts, because everything is actually intermingled and there's no boundaries. And the next thing you know, the Roman emperor is actually turning to the Seljuks and going, dude, can you help us with this guy? And the Seljuks, the ruler, the sultan, the sultanate of Rome, that's what they call themselves. Their flag was a two-headed eagle. The Roman flag was a two-headed eagle. Because when Emperor Romulus Augustus takes off his purple robes and sends it to Emperor Zeno, they've now unified the west and the east. They only have one emperor. So their new symbol for the Roman Empire is an eagle with two heads, one facing left, one facing right. Well, the Seljuks in Anatolia take that as their flag because their goal isn't to destroy the Roman Empire. It's to make a Muslim Roman Empire. Their goal is to eventually capture Constantinople one day. They don't hate the Roman Empire. They admire the Roman Empire. They want to be the Roman Empire. And so Suleiman I, the Seljuk sultanate of Rome, gets a request from the emperor, the Roman emperor, to go put down this Norman uprising. And he's baffled out of his mind. But yeah, sure, I'll help you. And in 1077, that Norman little kingdom vanishes. In 1084, the pope asks for an army to attack Spain. Spain was, at that time, majority-controlled by Muslims. The furthest north city that the Muslims owned in 1084 was a city called Barbastro. And so the pope asks for a Christian army to go to Barbastro and take it. One quarter of that army was a group of Normans. When they capture the city at first, they're pillaging it. They're slaughtering people. But the Normans decide they like the place and they stay. And the majority of the population is still Arab and it's still Muslim. And the Normans who stay start dressing like the Arabs. And they learn Arabic. And they're really digging Arab society. And they go Injun. And they go native. And it shocks everybody because it's like, wait, these French-speaking, blue-eyed, blonde Vikings are in Spain learning Muslim culture. And in a way, when you think about it, all three of these events that I just described are like little precursor crusades. In 1095, the pope holds two conventions. Both of them were in November. And Alexius Comnenus, Alexius I, the Roman Empire, comes to Italy. And this isn't a small thing because Italy isn't Roman. In fact, the pope in Rome and the Roman Empire have had a falling out that has lasted centuries. And they hate each other's guts a lot, not a little bit, a lot. So what happened was, as the Roman Empire was disintegrating, they managed to hold onto pieces of Italy, including the city of Rome. But the pope in Rome didn't like that because the original church had five patriarchs.

So the Orthodox Catholic Church. Orthodox is truth. Catholic is universal. So the Universal Truth Church, that was the original name of the Christian church. It had already had a schism. The Copts in Egypt had broken away in 284. But in the 700s, the church was still unified. But the pope in Rome came to resent the circumstances because the five patriarchs were the pope in Rome, the pope in Alexandria, the patriarch of Antioch, and the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Jerusalem. In other words, the original Christian church had five heads, two popes, two patriarchs, and an archbishop. By the way, pope came from the pope would have his child on his knee. And then people would come to kiss his ring. And they would hear the child saying, papa, papa. And it just stuck. Do you want me to say that again? The pope would have his child on his knee. You know, his kid. His kid, because the original Catholic Church didn't have a celibacy thing. They did the celibacy thing later so that they could make sure that the clergy didn't pass churches and church property down in their wills and illegitimate children in Europe couldn't inherit. So that's how that, that's why that happened. It wasn't to stop the popes from having babies. It was to stop the popes from having legitimate babies. It wasn't to stop the clergy from having families. It's just to stop the clergy from having legitimate families so they couldn't pass on church land. So anyway, in 756, the pope in Rome is sick of the fact that he's kind of second fiddle. He wants to be first fiddle. After all, it's Rome. It's Roman Empire. So he goes and he makes a deal with the Franks. And they break Rome out of the Roman Empire. It's Pope Stephen II who does this in 756. 763, Naples was still in the Roman Empire. Duke Stephen II, two different guys, same name, makes it easy to remember. 763, Naples breaks out of the Roman Empire and joins the pope in creating this papal state thing. Naples is never part of the papal states, but the idea that it's now going to be a separate thing from the Roman Empire, it breaks away. And the animosity between Rome and Constantinople just keeps growing and growing and growing until 1058. In 1058, they get into a spat that's so bitter and so nasty, they start to excommunicate each other. The patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates the pope. The pope excommunicates the patriarch. Next thing you know, they're interdicting. Interdicting is when you excommunicate whole cities, whole countries, whole regions, whole provinces. They start interdicting each other. And before they're done, Western Europe has completely interdicted Eastern Europe. And Eastern Europe has completely interdicted Western Europe. And the East took the truth, and the West took the universe. And that's why there's a Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, and a Greek Orthodox church. So when Alexios Komnenos goes to Italy in 1095, it's 37 years after they had just done this to each other. So the wounds are raw. They're fresh. And the reason Alexios Komnenos is there is he says, we're not making it. The sultanate of Rome has just taken almost all of Anatolia. We maybe have 10% of it left. We're finished to the east, which means all we have is a little piece of Southeastern Europe. We need your help. And Pope Urban II goes, you know what we should do? We shouldn't just help you a little bit. We should go all out. Let's retake the Holy Land and put it back in the Roman Empire. And Alexios Komnenos goes, yeah, why not? Let's do it. Let's make this happen. And so Pope Urban II comes out of those two talks, meeting with these top officials, including the Roman emperor, and says, I want an army to go to Jerusalem. We're going to conquer all of that and put it back in the Roman Empire. Let's go. 1096, a guy named Peter the Hermit gets up in front of everybody and says, we heard the pope loud and clear. Let's do this. And he puts together what's called the People's Crusade. It's basically just a bunch of peasants, some knights.

It's not the mercenary soldiers. It's not the knight. It's not all knights, right? It's just some peasants. They turn into a mob. And the first thing they do to sanctify the Crusades, this holy religious war, is they attack the Jews living in Germany. And the estimate is they murder about 2,000 Jews, and then they rape like 7,000 more Jews. And then they leave Germany on their way to the Holy Land to... I missed something. I feel like they read a piece of the New Testament that I... Did I? Where does it say that? Before thou goest on the crusade, holiest of holy, do what Jesus would have you do, slaughter Jews in Germany. Did I? And that is the first pogrom. That is the first documented case where Europeans, specifically post-Roman Empire, the Roman Empire hated Jews. Just like it was a hobby for them. They mostly did it in Palestine, right? It was just, ah, the Jews again. They keep throwing rocks at us. That's going to be ironic in a few centuries. So that's the first pogrom. 1096. That army works its way all the way to Constantinople. When it gets to Constantinople, Alexios Komnenos, they've been raiding the whole way because they need to feed themselves. So they're sacking villages. They're tearing into people's food stores. It's a disaster. It's a raiding mob. It shows up at Constantinople. Alexios Komnenos is like, I got to get rid of these guys as fast as I can. He goes, you know what you got to do? You got to cross the Bosporus. Here's my fleet. He puts them on a ship and he sends them across the Bosporus and they set up a camp. They actually attack a town. They capture it. And he's like, I'll send you food. You just stay on your side of the Bosporus. This is going to work out great. In the meantime, he's actually calling the Turks on the phone. Hey, there's some crazy dudes. I just deposited them on your end. Good luck with that. The guy who's now the son of Suleiman I, his name is Khalid Arslan. He decides he's got to get rid of these guys. And they want to take Nicaea. So Nicaea is pronounced Nicaea. I'm going to not say Nicaea again for the rest of the lecture. It drives me nuts. It's like Julius Caesar is Gaius Julius Caesar. Stop saying Julius Caesar. I feel like it could be a salad dressing or something. You know what I mean? It doesn't have to be the name of that guy. Nicaea was the capital for the Sultanate of Rome. So they actually put it almost across from Constantinople. And the reason is because that's their goal. It's Constantinople. They're nowhere near capturing it. They know that. But that's still, you know, it's nice to have a goal, even if it's a far off one. And so they've got Nicaea. It's like poison. And the mob, the peasant mob, the People's Crusade, as it's called, thinks it's going to capture Nicaea. And Clege Arslan basically sets up an ambush for them and slaughters them. And that's the end of the People's Crusade, for the most part. By the way, some of the leadership got away. Because, of course, that's how that usually works out. In any case, the real Crusader army doesn't show up until the next year. The real Crusader army is a mixture of nobles from across France and Germany, primarily, but also Italy, because there's Normans coming. So for our purposes, there's a bunch of Crusaders. There's too many. There's too many names. So I'm just going to simplify it a little bit. The Crusaders you need to know about are Bohemond of Toronto, not Canada, but Italy, and then his nephew, Tancred, and Godfrey de Bouillon, and Baldwin de Bologna. Baldwin and Godfrey are both from northern France. They weren't actually Normans, but they had definitely sided with the Normans. Their father, Eustace II, in fact, was with William the Conqueror in 1066 when the Normans decided to also conquer England. The Normans were very busy people. Oh, let's go to Spain. You know what? I southern it. Anatolia. England. In other words, long after the Vikings started speaking French, they're still tearing up the planet. They're on this permanent, multi-century rampage.

And it wasn't enough for them that they had captured England already twice. They wanted it a third time. They're like, this is good real estate. We want it back. And they got it. And so when Godfrey and Baldwin go on this crusade, they're not actually Normans, but they're part of the Norman sphere. So in a way, the top four of the five most important Crusaders are Normans. The fifth guy is a guy named Raimond. He's Raimond of Toulouse, also known as Raimond Saint-Gilles. He was Raimond the Fourth of Toulouse. And they show up. And Alexius, there's also Hugh de Vermandois. There's a few other guys. But I just want you to know those five. They show up at Constantinople. And they swear an oath of fealty. Well, not Tancred. He refuses. He wants nothing to do with this. And what they promise is that all the land they capture will be handed to Alexius Comnenus, the Roman emperor. And of course, they're lying through their teeth. They have no intention whatsoever of handing anything over. Their goal is to go in there, carve off land, and make their own little personal fiefdoms. They cross over the Bosporus with the Roman navy. It's 1097. Khalid Arslan isn't there to greet them. He's in southern Turkey fighting another Turk. And the reason is that Turk was trying to capture a city from an Armenian, Malatya. And Khalid Arslan was worried if Danishmen captured Malatya, it would put his position, it would weaken his position. So even though he's got this crusader threat on the west, he's so focused on his rivals that he's actually fighting them. He turns around when he realizes the crusaders have landed. He goes as fast as he can. By the time he gets there, Nicaea has already fallen. He convinces other Turks in the area to fight alongside him. They fight the crusaders at Doraleum. And they're defeated. And Khalid Arslan has to withdraw. And they just watch as the crusader army passes. The crusader army then goes through Armenia. So when the Roman Empire lost Anatolia, a piece of the Roman Empire broke away and didn't get captured by the Muslims and remained its own separate thing. It was oftentimes called Lesser Armenia. It was a little Armenian kingdom on what is today the southern coast of Turkey. And so the crusaders arrived there. Tancred was the kind of guy who would look at a situation and he would size it up real quick. He decides to basically conquer it. And he just goes and grabs all the strategic points in Lesser Armenia. And in the process, he's running into Baldwin. Baldwin has the same idea, but he's a little slower. So he keeps arriving after Tancred has done this. And the problem then is Baldwin has the bigger army. So he shows up and Tancred has a problem. Do I fight my fellow crusader, who's basically telling me he's taking my thing from me, or do I walk away? So the first time he walks away, the second time he fights. The crusaders have barely started the crusade and they're already fighting each other. Not many people die for the record. I want to say it was like two guys died and a few dozen are wounded. And then they call off the fight and they negotiate and they make a deal. But still, you can see there's already problems. They get over the mountains, the Tarsus Mountains, and they arrive at Antioch. Antioch is the first prize. So Antioch had only just been captured by the Muslims in 1084. So by the time that the crusaders have arrived, it's 1098. They set up a siege. But Baldwin decides, ah, not interested. And he takes off to the east and he goes to a city called Edessa and he puts Edessa under, he tries to capture Edessa. He doesn't put it under siege. He tries to capture Edessa. And Edessa was ruled by Armenians. And so Baldwin goes to the Armenians and he starts working out a deal with them. The leader of the Armenians in Edessa was a guy named Thoros. And Baldwin talks Thoros into adopting him and then letting him marry Thoros' daughter so that he will become now the heir to Edessa. And Thoros goes, okay. Well, Armenian culture was that when you, presumably, one of the chroniclers says this.

I'm not sure it's actually true. That's one of the problems you always have when you're reading historical accounts. You're always like, mm, did that really happen? According to the chronicler, Armenian culture was when you got adopted, your adoptive father and mother wore a really big gown and then you would take off your top, you'd have pants on, and then you would crawl under the gown, but they're completely naked under, and you hug them. Anyway, so apparently that's what Baldwin did with Thoros and his wife. And then he waited around for a while until a mob grabbed Thoros and his wife and hanged them. And that's the birth of the first crusader state. We now have the county of Edessa. Baldwin is the first crusader lord to rule a chunk of territory. I think it was May 1098. In the meantime, the siege in Antioch is still going on. Bohemond is the guy who wants Antioch for himself, but so does Raimond. So there's now two crusaders both pushing for it, but the problem is they still gotta capture it first. They haven't captured it. The guy who was the ruler of Antioch was a guy named Yarhisian. And Yarhisian starts putting out feelers to see if he can get help to break this, the crusader siege. And there's two guys nearby. There's the guy who's running Damascus, because even though they're part of the Seljuk Empire, the Seljuk Empire is already coming apart at the seams. The Seljuk warlords don't like each other. They don't cooperate. They see each other as rivals. They're constantly backstabbing each other. And the guy in charge of Damascus is a guy named Dukak. And Dukak's brother, Ridwan, is the guy in charge of Aleppo. They hate each other's guts. They see each other as rivals. So Yarhisian sends for help from Dukak. Dukak takes an army, and he has to go past Aleppo, right? And he's coming up past Aleppo. He gets to line of sight of the crusader army. He panics. He turns around, and he heads back to Damascus. So Yarhisian is like, oh, what do I do? I guess I have to talk to Ridwan. But he doesn't want anything to do with Ridwan, because Ridwan has a group of allies that he didn't like. The Hashishans. The Hashishans were Shia who decided they didn't like the direction Islam was going in. Sunnis were systematically winning. The Seljuks were Sunnis. And the Seljuks had replaced the Buyids, who were Shia, and had been defeating the Fatimids, not replace them. The Fatimids were also Shia. And so there is this guy, Hassan al-Sabah, who decides he wants to take a different approach to fight for the Shia cause. And that different approach is he's going to get into political intrigue, spying, and assassinating people. And Hashishan is where we get the word assassin from. Now, whether or not they used Hashish, we don't really know. That could have been the chroniclers trying to make a story up. In any case, Hassan al-Sabah's followers were total fanatics. And Ridwan, the ruler of Aleppo, was totally into them. And they were friends. And they were working together. And so this scares Hashishan. So he doesn't really want anything to do with this. He asks Ridwan to send an army. And Ridwan does pretty much the same thing Dukak does. And nothing comes of it. So Hashishan realizes he's running out of food. He's running out of time. But so are the crusaders. The crusaders are literally starving to death. They've been traveling for months. It's a year now. And they're running out of supplies. And they've been slaughtering their horses along the way. For food purposes, they're down to like 800 horses. And probably half the crusader army is already gone by this point. Some of them died. Some of them got sick. Some of them broke a leg. Some of them just were like, you know what? I don't need this. And they turned around and they headed home. So now, you can see on the inside, Antioch is desperate because he's trying to figure out how he's going to get through this. And the crusaders like Bohemond and Rahamund are trying to figure out how they're going to get in the walls.

And at that point, another guy jumps into the story. And the other guy is the ruler of Mosul, Karbuka. Karbuka, this Yahishan convinces Karbuka to come with an army. But Karbuka has to pass Edessa on the way. And he's looking at Edessa. And he goes, this Baldwin has it. I want it. And so he stops his army. For three weeks, he parks it outside of Edessa. And then he decides he can't take it. And so he abandons the siege. And he heads to Antioch. But by the time he gets to Antioch, his generals are working against him. And so there's all this intrigue going on before he even gets to Antioch. But even though he's still heading to Antioch, it's kind of too late. Because in the meantime, because he took so long, because he added those three weeks, there was a guy named Firuz. Firuz was accused of dealing on the black market even though he knew and was a friend of Yahishan. And so he gets charged a heavy fine. He's so furious about this that he decides to betray his own people. Firuz tells the crusaders, I'm going to let you in to the city. The crusaders are like, why would we believe you? This is probably a trap. He goes, I'm going to give you my son. If it's a trap, kill my son. Crusaders are like, really? OK. Why are you doing this? He goes, I want land, gold, and vengeance. They go, OK. We can give you all three of those. And so in the night, he had access to a window that looked out over the walls. And he just dropped a really long rope down. And the crusaders came up the rope one at a time till there were about 500 guys inside the city. And they began fighting for the gate. Yahishan hears the sound. He panics. He jumps on a horse. And he rides off. He leaves his son and wife and family behind. He just takes off. He doesn't even assess the situation. He just figures, it's over. I'm out of here. He rides for days. He finally collapses from riding. His entourage try to put him back on the horse. They can't get him back on the horse. He's having a depression bout or something. He just lays on the side of the road. A peasant walks by, recognizes who he is, and cuts his head off and takes it to the crusaders and gets a reward. In the meantime, Yahishan's son, Shams al-Daula, son of the state, sun as in the thing in the sky, not child. Shams al-Daula, isn't that a cool name? Who would name their kid that? Anyway, Shams is beautiful, but of the state? Anyway, he's got the citadel, and he's holding on to it. He's like, OK, they've got the city. But he's also watching what the crusaders are doing in the city. They're not kind conquerors. They're not walking through and going, oh, hi, everybody. How's it going? They are murdering everybody. They're just going through the streets, slaughtering the inhabitants of Antioch. They're killing the men. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the poor. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the women. They're killing the babies. They're leaving nobody. And Shams is up there in the citadel going, what? Who are these people? Why are they doing this? Why wouldn't you want the city intact, somebody to tax, somebody to work for you? Why are you slaughtering the city? And there's nothing you can do about it except resist and hold on to the citadel. That's when Karbuka's army shows up. Too late. Shams actually sneaks out of the city to go meet with him to try and coordinate what's going to happen next. How are they going to fight for the city? Because he hasn't given up. Karbuka fires him on the spot. He goes, you're done. You're not going back to the citadel. He then sets up his army to fight. But the princes who are with him fear, Dukak and Ridwan, that if he succeeds, he will then be able to establish authority over Aleppo and Damascus. And so they actually pull off the field and start heading home. And when the rest of his army sees this, they lose heart. The crusaders see what's happening. They see them pulling away. So they come running out of the gate because the crusaders had just found the lance that speared Jesus.

The Romans check to see if he's dead by spearing him. Because if fluid comes out, it means he's drowned in his own fluids. Because that's the goal of crucifixion, is to drown you slowly. And they found the lance that did this. It's not probably, right? Probably what happened was a monk took a lance and buried it and said, I'm pretty sure it's somewhere around here. You guys should dig for it. They dig. They find it. They're like, it's a miracle. And they come charging out of the city towards Kabuka's army. His army's morale has collapsed. His morale has collapsed. They just turn and run away. And the crusaders don't pursue them because they think it must be a trap because they can't figure out why the larger army just ran away for no reason. And then they have their city. There's a brief struggle between Raimond and Bohemond. Bohemond wins. And Bohemond gets to keep Antioch. And then the rest of the crusaders go, we're not here for Antioch. We're here for Jerusalem. Let's keep going. Bohemond goes, I'm good. I got what I wanted. I just wanted one of the richest cities on the planet. Although it's not rich anymore because you just killed its inhabitants. Anyway, I don't understand. They start marching to Jerusalem. The next city they come upon is a town called Ma'ara. When they arrive at Ma'ara, the population fights as hard as they can. So it's soldiers and citizens holding onto the city as hard as they can. But eventually the crusaders get in and they capture the city. When they do, the crusaders murder all 20,000 inhabitants and eat them. So there's multiple sources that say this on both sides. It's always good to have both sides saying it. I know of three sources that are from the crusader side that say they ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. And they describe it in slightly different ways, but it's mostly the same. One of them says that they spit at the adults and the children and just roasted them over a fire. Another one says that they would cut chunks of flesh off of them and then roast the individual pieces over a fire. But it's pretty widespread agreement that the crusaders ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. But there's a lesson in this story that applies to today. So one of the things people will do who want to defend an indefensible position is they'll find something to nitpick. So one of the crusaders says that the people were tortured first, one of the crusader chronicles. But none of the Muslim chronicles say that the people were tortured first. And so what I've seen happen, even on BBC, is somebody will say, well, they may have eaten the people, but they didn't torture them. So first of all, I think if you slaughter 20,000 people, including the children in front of the parents, that's torture. But then second, I kind of don't care if that crusader's chronicles said there was torture and there wasn't or not, because I still think there was a horrible crime committed here. Why are you focusing on that one thing? So no Muslims are saying there was torture. Only one crusader was saying there was torture. Nobody's having an argument with you, dude. There's no, sure, there's no torture. They just killed them and ate them. The reason I'm bringing this up is you see this kind of nitpicking. Like, for example, with the Holocaust, Holocaust deniers, I have seen, focus on the number. So for the record, it wasn't 6 million Jews. It was probably 5.1 to 5.4. 6 million is a slight exaggeration. It's not a big exaggeration, but it's a slight exaggeration. So the Holocaust deniers would focus on the number. Well, it wasn't 6 million. If you just take the 5.1, you took away their ability to do this. And now you can, well, how about the 5.1? And then there's nowhere they can go, because that's the number. The 5.4 is also a number, possibly. But just go with the low. 5.1 is already a horrific, nightmarish, hellish, evil. It doesn't have to be 6. You see what I'm saying? It doesn't have to have been torture. We're good with it just being cannibalism.

So be careful when you're arguing, when you're dealing with people. What is that called? I feel like it's distraction. It's not gaslighting. It's a little different thing. It's like, yeah, but what about? Anyway, the Crusaders then approached Tarabulus, Tripoli. It was one of the wealthiest cities on the planet at the time. So was Antioch, by the way, but not anymore. Tarabulus had a library in it with 100,000 books. It was ruled by a qadi, as opposed to a guy who took the title of maybe king or something. It was ruled by a guy who had the title, basically, judge, which is kind of cool. And the city was rich. It had these big walls around it. The Crusaders set up a siege. There was no point. There was no way they were getting in. So they bypass it. And then they decide, you know what? Let's just keep bypassing. We have Antioch. We have Edessa. We have Ma'ara. Let's just go straight to Jerusalem. Why are we capturing anything else? So they bypass Beirut. They bypass Arsuf, Acre. They just don't deal with any of it. Sur, Fayda, they go straight to Jerusalem. When they get there, they immediately attack it. They don't have any ladders. They don't have any siege equipment. This city has a wall on it. It has a citadel. So the Crusaders just go like a mob, charging up to the thing. And they're like banging on. And the defenders are pouring oil on them, shooting them with arrows, going, they can't get in here. Why are they doing this? And hundreds of them are wounded and killed for no effect. So then the Crusaders set up a siege. The problem is that Jerusalem is brilliantly designed to not be siegeable. So all the sprigs are inside the wall. So the area around it is arid. So the army stuck trying to besiege this thing basically has to run a water line to the Jordan River and by bucket bring the water to the army. That's a tough thing to do. But that's what they're going to do. And they're praying. They're hoping that God will intercede and give them a break. And it may not have been God, but it was the Genovese. The Genovese show up with some English volunteers by ship. And the Genovese brought the material needed to build siege equipment. They build the siege equipment, and they attack the city. So a little bit of, I'm going to bring in another actor, another player. So Egypt had been taken over by the Fatimids. The Fatimids were Shia who had started in North Africa. They took over Egypt. By the way, they found Cairo, 969. Cairo is just barely over 1,000 years old. It's such a baby for the Middle East, right? Middle Easters go, oh, you're 1,000? Oh, you're so young. You're so young. Your whole life is ahead of you. Of course, Cairo is a mega massive city. It's the sixth largest metropolitan area on the planet. There's only three metropolitan areas on the planet that aren't in Asia that are in the top 10. Cairo, Sao Paulo in Brazil, and Mexico City are the three that aren't in Asia. Everything else is Shanghai and Tokyo and Calcutta. You know what I mean? So the Fatimids are doing all right, but something really weird is happening. The Fatimids hated the Seljuks, but the Fatimids liked the Romans. They were allies. So when this whole crusade thing happened, in the mind of the Fatimids, who had just lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks a few years earlier, what's going to happen is the crusaders, who are technically in the service of the Roman Empire, are going to split that land. Syria will go to the Romans. Palestine will go to Egypt. That's what they're thinking is going to happen. So they decide, let's go grab Jerusalem from the Seljuks before the crusaders arrive to do our part in this alliance. They have an explicit alliance with Rome. This isn't like they're speculating. This is the deal that they've made with Alexios Komnenos. And so they send an army. They defeat the Seljuks. They capture Jerusalem. And then they send an envoy to meet with the crusaders. And the crusaders just keep coming. And the Egyptians are like, what are you doing?

No, no, you stay on that side. That's the deal. We're going to split this. And the crusaders just keep coming. And it becomes clear to the Fatimids, they're going to fight. They're allies. So they dig in. And that's when the siege equipment comes and the crusaders break in. And the Egyptian general in command of the defense of Jerusalem, Iftikhar, is looking at this going, how do I fight this now that the crusaders have a sectional wall? And so he retreats his men to the citadel. Once they're in the citadel, there's nothing he can do for the population of Jerusalem. All he can do is he can hold on. It's basically a thorn in their side. He's going to make it so that the crusaders can't control Jerusalem, but they can control parts of Jerusalem. And he won't control any of the merchant part of Jerusalem, the commerce part of Jerusalem. He'll just have a military piece. And eventually, he'll run out of supplies. And their goal is to fight to the death. There's no point. They saw what happened at Ma'ara, and they saw what happened at Antioch. They know who the crusaders are. They're supposed to be allies. They're being backstabbed. They get it. But the crusaders really want the city. And so they start negotiating. And the deal that they come up with, Raymond Saint-Gilles comes up with, is the following, that the Egyptians will leave in groups of five. They'll leave the citadel, and then they'll exit the city five at a time. That way, if the crusaders break their word, turn on them, they'll only kill those five dudes who are in the middle of leaving. And then the guys that are still in the citadel, they can just keep fighting. And anybody who escaped has already escaped. And that's the deal. So the first five go, and then another five, and another five. And you know the last five were like, oh, god, you know they're going to turn on us. But they don't. And the last five get away. And then the crusaders go over to the gate, and they close it. They go over to the Muslim quarter, and they just begin murdering everybody. They're just walking through the city, slaughtering person after person. Tancred, the guy that I talked about, with the strategic mind who kept running into trouble with Baldwin until Baldwin took Edessa, he can't take it. He's like, what are we doing? He runs over to a group of Muslims who were running. And he's like, whoa, whoa, I'm not going to kill you. He hands them his banner. And he says, if crusaders approach you, say you're with Tancred. And show them my banner, and they won't harm you. And they're, of course, grateful. And then he just sort of runs around the city trying to figure out what to loot and how to save people's lives. He hasn't given up the looting. Don't be naive about this. But he's also like, let's not just murder everybody. And he describes in his own memoir, later on coming upon that group of Muslims laying there dead on his bloody banner. The crusaders didn't even care. They're just like, you're with Tancred? A group of Muslims realize there's no surviving this. This is over. So they decide, let's go to the mosque. Let's die praying. And so they barricade themselves inside the mosques. The crusaders eventually smash the doors open. They slaughter everybody inside. They get buckets of water. They wash the blood out. They go to the top of the minaret. They break the crescent moon off, and they stick a cross on top. They say a prayer. Boom. Insta-church. Then they go to the Jewish quarter. Because see, Jerusalem was in four quarters. A Muslim quarter, two Christian quarters, and a Jewish quarter. Why are the crusaders here? So that Christians can own Jerusalem. Because clearly they could be there if they had half the city. Not interesting. So they go to the Jewish quarter. And the Jews know what's coming. It's not rocket science here. So they just start running to synagogues. They figure, you know, let's do like those Muslims did. We'll die in prayer. The crusaders believed that Jews were so horrible, so evil, you couldn't wash out the synagogue afterwards and turn it into a church.

So they just piled wood around the synagogues and burned them to the ground, burning the Jews inside alive. And then they go to the two Christian quarters. And of course, at this point, the Christian population is peeing itself. Because it's just watched half the city get exterminated. And they go, you have the true cross, where is it? And the Christians go, we're not telling you. You're savages. And the crusaders go, OK, we got you. And they start murdering the Christian clergy. They're like, who's a priest? Let's have your priest. And they just start slaughtering the priests. They're like, when we're done, we're going to do the deacons. And then we're going to start working on your families. Eventually, somebody tells them, here's the true cross. Please stop killing us. And they stop massacring the Christians as well. But then they turn to the Christians and go, remember that great schism in 1058? These Catholic priests are your new priests. Get used to it. We're not doing that anymore. Your orthodox ways are out. And they're like, yeah, whatever. And that's how the crusaders captured Jerusalem. Isn't that a heartwarming story? Is that too much sarcasm? At that point, the Egyptians are trying to figure out what to do. They send an army to Ascalon with the hope that they'll eventually be able to come back and fight to capture Jerusalem back. Godfrey is named the new ruler of Jerusalem. He does not take the title king. So he's just the ruler. We'll get to that later. He takes his army. He runs to Ascalon. And the Egyptians were in disarray. They weren't expecting this. And so they weren't set up properly. And he attacks them within their disarray. And a bunch of them fall back. They drop into the fortress. The rest of them escape. And the crusaders get another win. They don't capture Ascalon. But they definitely humiliate the Egyptian army and buy themselves some time. The Egyptians aren't done. Their leader is a guy named Al-Aftal Shahanshah. Now, Shahanshah is not Arabic. It's Persian. But Al-Aftal is. The best leader of leaders is his name. Dude, if you have that as your name, you need to get into politics. That's incredible. That's incredible. Anyway, so Al-Aftal is actually a slave. Isn't that weird? And he's actually Armenian. So the guy running the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt, it has a caliph, a khalifa. It has a Shia khalifa. The guy running it is actually an Armenian slave. There's an actual khalifa who's a Shia Arab. But the guy running it, the wazir, is an Armenian slave named the best leader of leaders. And he's like, we're not doing this. He sends an army. They attack Ramla. Godfrey is dead. Godfrey dies. We don't know why. There's one person says that he was killed in battle. Another person said he got sick. Another person said he was poisoned. Godfrey's dead. He was literally the ruler of Jerusalem for a year. He's replaced by Baldwin, the guy that captured Edessa. He comes down. It's his brother. So the chronicler said that when Baldwin received the news, he was very happy, but also a little sad that his brother had died. And he comes down, and he's crowned king. And that's the moment in the year 1100 that the kingdom of Jerusalem is officially going, because there's now a king. But Godfrey was at 1099 when they captured Jerusalem. He meets Al-Afdal at Ramla in 1101. And he defeats the Egyptian army. The Egyptian army withdraws. They come back the next year, because Al-Afdal is not going to give up easily. They attack Ramla. And this time, they beat the crusaders. The crusaders fall to Jaffa. And in the second battle at Jaffa, the crusaders win again. The Egyptians withdraw. They come back in 1105 to do it again. They attack Ramla. And they're defeated a third time. And the Egyptians give it a rest. They're like, OK, we're exhausted losing. In the meantime, something really critical happens for the purposes of how the crusades are going to unfold. And it's the Battle of Haran. So Haran used to be called Karhaye.

Karhaye is where the Romans fought the Persians for the first time in 53 BC. And the Romans were, I mean, just summarily defeated. It was a catastrophe. 26,000 Romans against 8,000 Persians. And the Persians maybe lost like 100, 150. And the Romans lost like 13,000 dead, 10,000 captured. So the crusaders are going to do another Karhaye, only the city's been renamed Haran. And the Muslim army comes out to meet it at Haran. It's southeast of Edessa. And the crusaders are defeated. They are beaten in the field. And in fact, one of the crusaders is captured. His name is Baldwin. But it's a different Baldwin. It's not the king of Jerusalem. It's his cousin. I think it's his cousin. And his cousin's name was Baldwin Borsk. That's what's in my, Borsk, I think is what it was. And he's become the count of Edessa when Baldwin becomes the king of Jerusalem. And so he goes into captivity. And he's stuck in captivity for four years. And while he's in captivity, Bohemond himself also gets captured. And he ends up in captivity. So there's two crusaders that are now out of the picture because they've been captured. And then Raimon decides he wants Terabolus. So Raimon was probably supposed to become the king. But for whatever reason, he decided he didn't want to be the king of Jerusalem. He wanted to be the king of Terabolus. So what he did was he set up a siege for Terabolus after they captured Jerusalem in 1102. And he's built a fortress north of Terabolus. And he's fighting day after day. The defenders of Tripoli come out late in 1104. They set his fortress on fire. Raimon himself is severely injured in the fire. He survives it but dies like three or four months later from his wounds. So the crusaders have now lost basically three, four of their top crusaders. Godfrey is dead. Raimon is dead. Bohemond is in captivity. Baldwin, spoiler alert, who will become Baldwin II, who will become the second king of Jerusalem, is in captivity. So that's a weird story, obviously. And so they're in trouble. By this point, most of the crusaders have actually gone home. In other words, if the Muslims had just attacked in an organized fashion at that moment, there was nothing to stop them from just taking it all back. But the Muslims are in such disarray. And each of these Turkish warlords, these Seljuk warlords, hates each other's guts so much they just won't cooperate together. It gets so weird that at some point, 1108, there's going to be a battle. Baldwin gets released. And Baldwin is going to make a deal with the ruler of Mosul. And he's going to field an army. So it's going to be a crusader army next to a Seljuk army. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight against each other. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight Tancred. Tancred ended up becoming the regent of Edessa while Baldwin was in prison. Tancred doesn't want to give it up. He doesn't want Baldwin to come back. Tancred goes and he gets Ridwan, the guy from Aleppo. So there's a Tancred. The crusader has a Muslim ally. And they're next to each other in the field. And they're going to fight a battle against a Muslim crusader army. And by the way, they defeat Jawali and Baldwin. They have to escape. And Tancred basically keeps Edessa as a result. He's eventually talked into participating in the siege of Tarabulus. They're going to actually try and take it once and for all. And when he does that, he reconciles with Baldwin. But here we are. It's 1108. The crusaders just captured Jerusalem nine years earlier. And there's a battle where there's Muslims and crusaders on both sides fighting each other. Like, it's already gone sideways in every way you can imagine. And that's the first part of the Crusades. Having said that, there's so much more to this story, which is what I warned you from the beginning. Like, I am not going to get through the Crusades. I literally got you to 1108. By the way, my goal was 1125. But I think I'm basically out of time. So I'm surrendering and accepting I'm not going to get to my goal.

But to put things in perspective, the second crusade is 1145. The kingdom of Jerusalem is going to go down in a ball of flames. In case you didn't know that, I hope I didn't spoil this for you. But in 1187, after the Battle of Hattin. So then the third crusade is after that. And then there's a fourth crusade in 1202. And so in other words, the Crusades are just going to keep going for a while. And they actually don't end by most people's. The usual number we use is 1291. So it's 195 years. I've just covered nine of it. Well, 12 if you include the, well, even more. 13 if you include the peasant crusade. By the way, there's supposedly a children crusade in this. It's a lot of fun. The Crusades were great. I'm going to tell you the children crusade. I'm going to let you go. It happens later. So this is out of time sequence. But it's just too fun since I mentioned it. A group of children think if they go and just show up in Jerusalem, the Muslims will give it back. Because this is after the Battle of Hattin. So they don't, children obviously walking from France to Palestine is a little tricky. So what they do is they walk to Venice. And they show up. And they ask, will you, the Venetian Navy, just take us? And the Venetians go, yeah, of course. It would be our sacred duty to take you. And the children are never heard from again. They were sold into slavery. The Venetians just put them on the ships, took them to slave markets, and just. Isn't that just capitalism? I'm pretty sure that's just capitalism. All right. Thank you for your time. And if you want to come see my show and tell, I'll stick around to let you do that. And actually, you know what? I'll field a question. And then I'll let you go. How about that? I always forget to do that. I actually don't always. No? No questions? OK, good. We're done.

I have some stuff I want to do before I jump in, and I also want to talk about what I'm going to do when I jump in so that it's not a complete surprise. So one of the things I want to do, I have a lot of trouble with, which is it's self-promotion. So I'm going to pass these around, these are just bookmarks. It's advertising my novel, and I brought a copy of my novel. So I have a novel, and it's The Blood Throne of Caria, and the reason I'm pushing it, and it makes me feel dirty doing this, so I'm probably just off a little bit, is because I'm ramping up to try and put out another novel, and if I can get a little bump in sales before that happens, it helps me. So if you like that kind of stuff, get my novel. That kind of stuff is historical fiction. I'm particularly obsessed with basically everything from Iran to Italy. That's like my zone where I obsess about. This is set in the 6th century, 5th century, 5th century B.C. in the southwest corner of Turkey. And it's about a real person, so it's historical fiction, but she doesn't have, her name is Artemisia, she doesn't have a lot of, how should we say this, there's a lot of attacks done on her by historians, and so my goal in writing this novel was to figure out what was true and what was a lie, and then correct the lie. But I can't claim it's the truth because it's speculation on my part, so hence historical fiction. Somebody's going to ask at some point what they should read. This is a fun way to start, it's The Crusades Through Arab Eyes, wouldn't that be a novel idea, by Amin Malouf. It's an old book, it's 1985 if I remember correctly, but there, now I've done that part. I also want to dedicate this talk to a group of people, so it's a small list, but I just want to do this. Omar, Saeed, Iman, Iman, Iman, and then Hadi, I'm probably forgetting somebody else I intended. You know what, I'm going to throw Jayden into the mix, he'll be like, oh my god, I can't believe you threw my name in there. I actually have a, I was just gifted a piece of rock from Palestine from the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and so I'm probably going to hold on to it the entire talk because, well, my talk is going to take place in Palestine mostly, so this is kind of a strange thing to have right now. Also, let's see, what did I do with it, I probably already lost it. I brought show and tell, but it won't work because the camera is too small and you're sitting too far away. I actually brought coins from the time period, so I will, after the talk, you can come up and look at it, and then what I'll do is we'll put, for the people who are watching this on video, I'll just put pictures up on it, but just to give you an idea of what I have, this is a coin from William II. It's after the period I'm talking about today because I'm not going to get to him. William II was the king of Sicily. The year in my head is 1153, but who knows. Anyway, the reason I brought it was because I am going to talk about the Normans, and I'm going to talk about Sicily a little bit for background purposes, and I kind of wanted to stick this in your head a little bit. On one side, the coin is written in Latin. On the other side, it's written in Arabic because the Normans took Sicily from the Arabs, and so they just made it so that they were a bilingual society. This, let me see, hold on, I'll do this one here. This coin is going to matter because this is Romanus IV, the Roman emperor. I'm going to talk about him in a little bit of detail, just briefly, because he's going to set things in motion that make the rest of the story possible, and then when you look at the coin, you'll see that the quality of the coin dramatically falls when you get to Alexios Komnenos. Alexios Komnenos becomes the Roman emperor just like 11 years later, and the quality of the coin is terrible compared to this one, so it makes you realize how far into decline the Romans had fallen. One of the things I'm going to do is I'm going to do a little bit of background, and in the process of doing the background talk, I'm going to bring up the birth of the Arab Empire.

We don't know what year this coin was minted because it doesn't have a year on it. It's actually a counterfeit coin. The Arabs, when they made their empire, needed coins, and they went and stole a Roman mint, and they began minting coins, Roman coins, so it has Latin letters on the back. It has three Roman emperors, well, an emperor and his two sons on the front. They're holding in one hand a cross, and in the other hand a globus cruciger with a cross sticking out of it, so there's literally six crosses on this coin, and this is the Arab Empire, one of the Arab Empire's first ever coins. It was minted during the Rashadin period. We don't know a date, so I can't tell you who, but most likely it would have been Uthman ibn Affan or the Khalifa Ali ibn Abi Talib. It's probably not one of the earlier two, and then this coin is Muawiyah I. He did the same thing. It's a Roman emperor with two crosses in his hand, and on the back, Latin letters, and one of the reasons why I wanted to sink that into your heads is to also show how the boundary between things is really blurry, right? We're a society of people who want to put everything into categories, including ourselves. We can't wait to label ourselves, and we keep breaking it down further and further, and the reality is these categories are all imaginary and made up. Nobody is that easy to categorize, you know what I mean, let alone whole societies, especially societies where everything is blurred together. I probably have said Arabic words, for example, that are English in this. I wasn't paying attention, but you know, at one point I might say the word nadir or zenith or zero, and then by contrast, Arabic is filled with Latin words. For example, the word faloos, the word for money, comes from pholos. It literally was, one of those coins was a pholos that I was holding up, and so the word is actually Latin. It's not Arabic. It's just the Arabs used the Latin word. Cres, the word for cherries, comes from crassinus, which is the Latin word for cherry, and it can go on and on because everything is stuck together. All right, so as Eric Deggans would say, I'm going to do a bunch of table setting. Eric Deggans is a TV critic that I listen to on NPR, and he recently complained about too much table setting, but I don't know how to not do table setting, and the reason I have to do the table setting is if I just jump into the Crusades and start talking about it, it'll be entertaining because there's a lot of violence. Like, if you enjoy People Massacred, and I know you do because I watch the same movies you do, then this is a great story because it is gory, but it's kind of helpful to know why it happened, and how did we even get into the situation where it was possible. So I can't skip that. Having said that, I have no intention and no belief that I can, even if I wanted to, cover the entire Crusades. So in other words, this is part one. You're just setting this up now. I will try to do the entire Crusades, but I'm betting I'm going to have to do four parts. One of the reasons I don't know is, some of you have figured this out about me, I don't write my lectures out, so I actually don't know what I'm going to say until it starts happening, and so as a result, I don't know how the timing of this is going to land, so it'll be fun. I'm exploring this with you, and we'll see where it goes. It'll probably be a train wreck, and people will hate it, but it'll be fun for me anyway, and that's the important thing. All right, so, to do this, I need to introduce some actors. The first actor I want to introduce is probably the most important actor in the story, and it's the Arabs. And the reason they're the most important, obviously, is because the Crusaders are going to invade the Arab world to fulfill their goal of making a kingdom of Jerusalem. So, the Arabs created an empire that most people don't refer to, don't talk about, that's basically been deleted from history. It's the Arab empire, although I've frequently heard it referred to as the Muslim empire.

The reason you need to not do that and call it the Arab empire is the Arab empire was created by Arabs, like the Roman empire was created by Romans. We don't call it the pagan empire, and when it becomes Christian, we don't call it the Christian empire, right? When it becomes Japanese, we don't call them the Shinto Buddhist empire, you know what I mean? When Alexander the Great made his empire, we don't call it the pagan empire. So, why would we do this in this one particular case? And what I'm going to pose to you is the reason we usually don't even name it, and if we do, we sometimes call it the Muslim empire, is because of anti-Arab hate. We have that running through the core of our society, the core of our civilization, and one of the reasons is because of the events that led to the Crusades and the Crusades themselves. In other words, by doing anti-Arab hate, you're perpetuating this old wound. It's time to let it go. Although, by the time we're done tonight, you'll be like, oh my gosh, what's that about? So, it'll be good. The Arabs began making their empire, and by empire, I mean it in the true sense of the word empire. To be clear, a state that rules multiple countries and nations. That's all you need to be to be an empire. Having said that, you could claim that in the United Kingdom today, what's left of the great empire is still an empire, because Great Britain is Wales, England, and Scotland. That's three countries. And then, throw in Northern Ireland, Gibraltar, Bermuda, and the Falkland Islands and Malvinas, and you end up with multiple countries, right? Or at least pieces of multiple countries. So, they began making their empire in 633, when the first Khalifa, Abu Bakr, launches his armies into the Persian and Roman Empires simultaneously, in what should have been a completely insane, impossible, can't-be-done event. And it's not only done, but by 711, the Arab Empire became the largest empire on the planet to that date. There have been larger empires since, but there had never been a larger empire before this. It stretched, by 711, from Spain to Pakistan. It went all the way into Central Asia. So, if you can conjure a map of the Roman Empire, it owned about 60% of the Roman Empire. Conjure a map of the Persian Empire, it owned 100% of the Persian Empire. And it went into Central Asia, and it went into India. Fine? For those of you, because I just said Pakistan, for those of you who don't know, the British cruelly and sadistically cut Pakistan out of India. Pakistan is India. It's just, you know how the Brits are. It's divide and conquer, wreck, destroy, ruin. India is named after the Indus River, which is 100% in Pakistan. It's just cruel. You know what I mean? Anyway, so, this Arab Empire, by the way, when it was born, it had a tiny Muslim population. But by 711, it had a few more Muslims. It was maybe 5-10% of the population was Muslim. The empire itself was majority Christian, 60% Christian. In fact, probably somewhere around 60% of the world's entire Christian population was in the Arab Empire. Isn't that hard to comprehend? The majority of the world's Christians lived in the Arab Empire, an empire that was majority Christian. In 711. So, the empire has been around that, right? From 633 to 711, it's already been around for a few decades. It's not like it was just born. One of the reasons why Muslims are such a small percentage of the population is they didn't convert by the sword. There was no compulsion to become Muslim. At first, what the Muslim conquerors did was they said, if you're Christian or Jewish, you worship the book. Therefore, you have a pathway to heaven. So, you have to be treated like a full human. But then, as they kept conquering, they kept running into other religions. And they just kept extending it. So, the Zoroastrians, okay, yeah, why not? And, right, centuries later, by the time they're in India proper, they're like, yeah, Hindus too, it's all good. We're going to make this work. Right?

That was what kept happening. By the way, the Arab Empire in 711 was probably about five, ten percent Buddhist, just to mess with you. Afghanistan had a giant Buddhist population. So, it seems counterintuitive, but there it is. That empire gets into a conversation with itself. And the conversation it has with itself stems from a problem that they had. The Arabs had never ruled themselves, let alone ruled an empire, right? Until this moment. 633, the year they launched the empire, is the year the Arabs, for the first time in history, ruled the entire Arabian Peninsula. So, they don't even catch their breath. They conquer the Arabian Peninsula, put it under a single state, and then they just go, they just keep going. Next thing you know, they've conquered the Persian Empire, and they've conquered the majority of the Roman Empire, and they're in France, trying to conquer France. What was the Battle of Tours? 732 is in my head, I hope that's not wrong. So, this empire has a problem. Arabs don't know how to run an empire. They've never run an empire before. Normally, conquerors are arrogant, and they're cruel, and they're sadistic. Like, take the Romans. So, I'm part Italian. So, for those of you that like being mean to Italians, a little bit, but it's okay. Gaius Julius Caesar, the guy you incorrectly called Julius Caesar, when he conquered Gaul, there were three million people living in Gaul. When he left, there was one million people living in Gaul. He murdered one million, he enslaved one million, and then he looked at the remaining million and went, welcome to the Republic. By the way, we'd like for you to worship our gods. Let's have your taxes now. Oh, and we're going to steal your technology. That's what conquerors often did, right? The Arabs, on the other hand, were humble about this, and they told the Romans and the Persians they had conquered, we don't know what we're doing, we don't know how to do this. We want to just leave you where you are. You're a bureaucrat, you're running this province, don't stop, and then we'll watch you. Maybe we'll figure it out, but in a few generations, hopefully we'll have this sorted out. In the meantime, I'm going to counterfeit this money over here. It's got crosses on it, but that's okay. I'm okay with that. I like Jesus. And that was kind of their conversation. So, the reason that matters is Muawiyah, I showed you the coin. Muawiyah I moves the capital after a civil war that lasts five years, that ends in 661. He moves the capital to Damascus from Medina. When he puts the capital in Damascus, he puts it in a former Roman city. And that matters, because it meant that the bureaucrats around Muawiyah are shaping the policies he's creating, and it orients the Arabs in the Arab empire west. It orients them towards the Romans. And in fact, he's going to lay siege to Constantinople. He won't capture it. But then a subsequent Arab the next century is going to do it again, and they'll fail a second time. Had they captured Constantinople on either of those two, they would have taken out the Romans too, because they had already conquered the Persians. Yazdegerd III was the last Persian emperor. He's gone. Persians are done. But the Romans are still hanging on. For the record, what saved the Romans was the emperor put out a contest. He said, anybody who can invent something that can save us, I will give you a sum of money. A Syrian refugee, isn't that cool? Isn't that weird, a refugee? I thought we were supposed to put them in cages. Anyway, a Syrian refugee invented a flamethrower. So what happened was the Roman Navy had a chain blocking the vulnerable north end of Constantinople. They had a chain that went across, so the Arab Navy couldn't get through it. And the Roman Navy was hiding behind the chain, this big chain. And the Romans pulled up the chain, and the Roman Navy started coming out. The Arabs are like, why are they coming? We'll just sink them. This is suicide. And the Romans came right up on them.

And the Arabs had no idea they had flamethrowers. And they just opened up and set the Arab fleet on fire. And that's how they saved Constantinople. Anyway, that's why you should never turn away Syrian refugees. That is the rule on that one. Or is the rule you should make them. Sorry, I went to a dark place. All right, so in 750, there's a coup d'etat. The Abbasids overthrow the Umayyads. And they move the capital to a brand new city that they've just built on a village. The village is called Baghdad. It's a Persian village. And they move the capital to this city. They rename it Medina Tassalam, the City of Peace. And they build this amazing fortress system. It's a two-layer fortress system. It's incredible. The city should be impossible to capture. And science and commerce and philosophy pour into the city. Art pours into the city. And the city grows really fast and becomes a major city really quickly. But it's in Iraq, which was Persian, not necessarily ethnically, by the way. There was a huge Arab population in Syria during Roman period and a huge Arab population in Iraq already. What I mean is it was the Persian Empire. But there were also a lot of Persians as well because they were intermingled. Because you've got to remember, this is a pre-nationalistic society. It's before people went, oh, my DNA is better than DNA by virtue of my race or by virtue of my nation. Back then it was, I was born in this city and that makes me better than you. It was city discrimination, which is fun. We have that a little bit. Like whenever a Houstonian walks up to you, you know he's from. Anyway, so this means that the conversation changes. Because now it's got a Persian orientation because the Abbasids are surrounded by Persian bureaucrats. And those Persian bureaucrats have two agendas. One, to shift the attention of the Arab Empire east. And two, to destroy it. That is their goal. They are going to break this thing. The reason is, is because most of the countries that the Arabs conquered adapted and began to speak Arabic. Or at least there was a large population slowly starting to speak Arabic. Like Arabic probably didn't become the major language in Egypt until about 900 AD. But there was already a population of people speaking Arabic for commercial purposes and for political purposes by this point. The Persians weren't learning Arabic. They were holding onto their identity and their language. They had converted to Islam, but they weren't going to convert to being Arab. So right, ethnically Egyptians aren't actually Arab. But culturally and linguistically, they're 100% Arab. I keep running into conversations with people like, well, Egyptians aren't real Arabs. Oh, do they still speak ancient Egyptian? I miss that. I mean, they do. If you go to a Coptic church and listen to the liturgy, they do it in Coptic. Coptic is ancient Egyptian. Ancient Egyptian is as alive in Egypt as Latin is in Italy. You can hear it. It's not dead dead. It's just mostly dead. Right? And so what it means to be Arab is really more of a linguistic thing than it is an ethnic thing. It's not a DNA thing. It's do you speak Arabic? Well, the Persians rejected that. They refused. They resisted. And so little by little, they start to pick at the Arab empire from within, because they're the bureaucrats running it now. And pieces of the Arab empire start to come off. If I remember correctly, the first piece comes off, well, the first piece comes off in 756. Spain. One of the Umayyads escaped the Abbasids. They massacred the Umayyads. They tried to kill all of them so there would be no rivals out there causing them problems. Well, one of them got away. He snuck through Egypt. He went across North Africa. He went to Spain. And in 756, six years after the Abbasid revolt, he pulls Spain out of the empire. And so the empire is already starting to come apart in 756. I think 727 is the next time a major piece comes out. And that's over in Persia. And little by little, the Arab empire starts to disintegrate.

Eventually, it will lose all of North Africa and Persia. And as it's shrinking, the khalifa, the system where you had a person who was a religious and a political authority, is starting to become symbolic. And they're being replaced by wazirs. They're being placed by ministers. And so there's actually now a secular leader who's running the show. And the khalifa is becoming a symbolic leader who's mostly just confined to a palace in Baghdad and has no meaningful role other than to walk around the garden looking pretty. And by the time that happens, it also means that the person who has the best position symbolically to unify people has no political power, which is bad if you're trying to hold things together. I can't give you an exact date when the Arab empire stops functioning. But it's pretty finished by 900. I've seen the year 833 used as well. I think you can have an argument about when that's happened. By the time the Buyids are running Baghdad, it's over. There's no two ways about it. The Buyids were Persians who had broken out Iraq and a huge chunk of Iran and were ruling it on their own. And of course, the reason that matters now is if there is going to be a European invasion down the road, there isn't an empire to stop it. Well, there will be, because I'm going to have to introduce another actor, and it's the Seljuks. In 1037, a group of Turkish warriors begin to conquer the Middle East. And they create an empire to replace the Arab empire. And that empire is the Seljuk empire. So for the record, Turks are from Central Asia. They are in the same cultural linguistic group as Mongolians, Koreans, and the Japanese. I'm going to let you sit on that one for a moment. I take that in. Japanese, Koreans, Mongolians, and Turks are the same cultural linguistic group. Do this as an exercise. Find a Turk and stand up next to a Korean and have the Koreans start speaking Korean and have the Turks start speaking Turkish. It is crazy cool. It is very, very super cool. You should totally do this experiment. You can. They exist here in Austin. Just start looking for them. The Turks are starting to move into the Middle East for multiple reasons, one of them being they're serving as mercenaries. Another one is they're just looking for land to inhabit. It's a migration. There are immigrants coming in. And by 1037, they're politically in a position where they start conquering. And they end up conquering a huge chunk of the Asian part that the Arab empire had. I'm making this number up because I never measured it. But they probably ended up with about 30% of the Arab empire, maybe a little bit more. Maybe a third of the Arab empire. Let me introduce another actor, the Roman Empire. So I've said this before in lectures. So people who have seen my previous lectures will probably be annoyed with me because I'm just repeating myself. But I have to a little bit because I'm going to assume that you haven't. And that way it makes sense. When I was a kid, when I was an adult, I was taught that the Roman Empire fell on September 4, 476 AD. This is one of my big pet peeves about the way we teach history. The Roman Empire did not fall on September 4, 476 AD. That's just a lie. There's nothing even remotely truthful about it. What happened on September 4 is Romulus Augustus, the Western Roman emperor, took off his purple robes, stuck it in a box with a note attached to the box that said, we don't need two emperors anymore. We just need one emperor. And he sent it to Emperor Zeno. Emperor Romulus Augustus was in Ravenna, Italy. That was the capital of the Western Roman Empire at that time. They had long since abandoned Rome. The city of Rome existed. It was largely empty, though. It had 1 and 1 half million people at its height. And at that point, there were 40,000 people. Can you imagine walking through the streets of a city that at one point had 1 and 1 half million people and there's only 40,000 people there? Talk about ghost town. What was that like?

And of course, most of those houses and buildings have collapsed, and they're in ruins. But still, that must have just been a trip. We were great ones. What happened to us? This is terrible. And then you look at the coins, and they were striking at the time. And you're like, dude, what happened to your artists? They all died, too? Find some artists. So what happened was the Roman Empire fell on May 29, 1453. So when you were a kid, probably this happened. It happened to me. People would go, we don't know why the Roman Empire fell. Maybe it was the gladiators. They stopped doing the gladiating like centuries earlier. So probably not. Maybe it was the orgies and the eating festivals. They also stopped doing some of that, too. I mean, they still had a little bit of that going. But not as much as they did during the Republic. That was the height of that. You know what I mean? That was the good old days. So that's probably not it. Lead pipes. If lead pipes was a problem, we're in trouble. I don't know if you know this, but we have lead pipes in the United States. All the urban centers have lead pipes, as Flint found out. So probably not the lead pipes, either. For the record, what happens is hard water calcifies the inside of the lead pipes, and then the lead is no longer a problem because there's basically a salt layer inside the pipe protecting you from the lead. But then your city council decides they don't have enough money. Why? Because we went through a tax-cutting frenzy because somebody went, taxes are evil. They pay for things like water. What do you mean taxes are evil? Roads. Where do you think roads come from? Schools. Schools are also taxes. Hospitals, scientific research, police departments, fire departments. It's not the Libertarian Ferry that delivers that stuff. That's taxes. Unless you're lucky and you had a bunch of oil, like Texas does. Anyway, but it's OK. We keep our electric grid functioning just as well as Egypt does. So that's amazing. It's fun living in a third world country again. You know what I mean? It's very familiar. I go to Mexico in the summer so I have electricity. Also, by the way, it's cooler. Push that through your brain. I still can't get over that. I'm very confused about that. So I've derailed myself. Why did I go down that path? So here's what happened. I was taught we don't know why the Romans collapsed. But we do know why the Romans collapsed. And the reason we know why the Romans collapsed is because I can actually tell you the exact day the Romans collapsed. I don't know what it's telling me. Actually, it's telling me you need to go. The Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453. The reason why the Romans collapsed on May 20, you thought I was kidding, the reason why the Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453, and I can tell you exactly why, is because an Ottoman army captured the last Roman capital, Constantinople. Constantinople was the last piece of Roman real estate. In other words, there's no mystery why the Romans fell apart, the Roman Empire fell apart. It fell apart because it was conquered. And we know the exact moment it was conquered. In other words, there's no reason to have doubt about the date that the Roman Empire fell. Here's what happened. There was a guy named Hieronymus Wulf. About a hundred years after the Roman Empire fell, and I want to say a hundred years, but that's probably wrong, somewhere around 1550, right? The Roman Empire fell 1453. He decided he was going to rewrite history on purpose and tell a really big lie on purpose. He had two goals. One, he wanted to divorce the Roman Empire from its ignominious defeat at the hands of the Muslims. The Roman Empire was a Christian empire. He was a Christian. He was a German. And he hated the idea that Muslims had conquered the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire had been defeated by Ottoman Turks. And so he decided he was going to move the date of the conquest of the Roman Empire to a hundred years earlier, lie to everybody, and people would accept the lie because it would divorce the end of the Roman Empire from the Muslims.

And then the second goal was, in 476, Odo Vakur, the German, declared himself the king of Italy. Now, to be clear, he left Italy in the Roman Empire. He didn't separate Italy from the Roman Empire. So Italy just became, instead of a set of provinces, it became one kingdom with Odo Vakur, the ruler, who sent taxes to Emperor Zeno and flew a Roman flag. It's weird, but it also means Italy is still in the Roman Empire. But because Odo Vakur was a German, then Hieronymus Wolf could say, the Germans took out the Roman Empire. But it's not true. It's a lie. It's a bald-faced lie. So by the time we get to the Crusades, there's a Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire is playing a major role. And the reason the Roman Empire is playing a major role is it's been in decline for a long time. When I say the Roman Empire fell in 1453, you have to remember that's after 2,200 years. The Romans aren't quite as long as the Egyptians in terms of the length of their history, right? When the Romans conquered Egypt in 31 BC, Egypt was a 4,500-year-old civilization, right? It's not quite on that scale, but it's really close. It's half that scale. And Rome had been in decline since the 200s. In other words, Rome had been on its way out for 13 centuries. So for more than half of the length of time that Rome had been around, it was struggling to survive. That's what you call tenacity, resilience. That's incredible. Who survives barely making it for that long? At one point, they actually do get conquered. And they manage to put themselves back together and reconstitute themselves and just keep going. They break up on multiple occasions. Zenobia is my favorite. There was a woman who led a rebellion in Syria, and she captured Syria, Turkey, Palestine, and Egypt, and she made her own little empire. They were too sexist to let a woman rule, so she made her six-year-old son the actual emperor. But she ruled, and his name was Wabalathus. Wabalathus. Isn't that a cool name? Anyway, and by the way, Palmyra was her capital. So sort of a strange twist, right? She was like in the middle of Syria, made her capital there. Don't worry, the Romans killed her. Something like that's not going to be allowed. And they put the empire back together, and then it fell apart. It was like an accordion. The Arabs come, tear them up. The Germans tear them up. It's a mess. The Huns tear them up. The Bulgarians tear them up. It's just wave after wave until they finally just go down once and for all in 1453. But by the time the story of the Crusades is happening, the Romans are desperately trying to hold on to what is today Turkey. I'm going to use Anatolia just because I think it makes it a little bit less confusing, at least in my brain. Anatolia was the name at the time. Turkey is the name today because it's the Turks' habit, right? They've named it after themselves. Another actor I want to introduce might sound strange. It's the Vikings. I'm going to tell you something really strange. The Vikings are one of the reasons why the Crusades happened. Isn't that weird? You're like, wait, why? Work with me here on this one because it's kind of strange. So the Vikings were Germans. They were the Germans who settled Scandinavia. Scandinavia was kind of like the worst piece of real estate in Europe at the time. Today, obviously, it's like heaven. But back then, it was the garbage piece that nobody wanted to go to. In other words, the people who became the Vikings, they never called themselves Viking. Viking is a term we've retroactively put on top of them, like the term Byzantine that Hieronymus Wolf came up with for the Roman Empire's last 1,000 years, 977 years for those of you who want it to be more precise. There's no such thing as a Byzantine Empire. The Vikings, I'm going to use the term Viking anyway, though. The Vikings got stuck with this piece of real estate where you really couldn't grow a crop. So pretty much all you could do was raise cattle and go fishing. And at some point, their population had reached a threshold.

They had sort of reached the carrying capacity of cheese rolls and dried fish. And when that happened, they had no choice but to start looking for alternatives. And they took two approaches, by the way. One approach the Vikings did was they set out to start trading. They thought, you know what? We can fix our problem if we can do trade, because we'll have the money to buy the food that we need. And the Eastern Vikings, the Swedes, got so into this, they actually started trying to figure out where they could go to. And they started reading their sagas. This is the 8th century. Not reading their sagas. They were oral histories. They were listening to their sagas. And the sagas told the Vikings that the place the Germans were from was Iran. By the way, Kermani-Iran, which is where we get the word German, because ga and ka, when languages change over time, are interchangeable. So Kerman, German. We say German because we pronounce it like a French person would. But a German says German, right? So if you're saying the study of Germanic studies, it's Germanismus, because they don't say it the way a French person would. So the sagas tell the Vikings you're originally from Persia. So the Swedes go, wow, that's an idea. Let's go. Let's see what we can find. And so what they would do is they would go to what is today Latvia. They would take their long ships up the Dvina River. They'd go as far inland as you could get, pretty close to the city of Rzhev. They would pull their ships out of the water, fully loaded, because they have to carry their supplies. They can't leave the supplies behind. So they would carry these fully loaded ships over land until they got to the Volga River. I mean, that's a pretty manly, you know what I mean? Like, they've got their armor and their weapons. And they're hauling these. I want to go backwards in time just to see this. You know there was a lot of grunting. And then they put the ship in the Volga River. And they sailed the Volga River all the way to the Caspian Sea. And they went down the Caspian Sea to the Persian coast. And they're like, hi. And the Arabs had just conquered Persia a couple of centuries earlier. And they're walking around Persia going, what is all this? You have modern agriculture and modern medicine. And you're doing philosophy. And you've invented zero. And you're doing algebra. And the Vikings are like, we don't even have a written language. We shouldn't have left. We could have had this. And they began trading. Now, to supplement their trading on that long trade route, they would also raid. And they would attack the Slavic populations along the way. And they would take some for slaves. And then they would sell them into the slave markets, make a little bit of extra koi. So maybe that. Full disclosure, I'm a quarter Swedish. So if there's a little bit too much admiration on my part, it's just ugly nationalism. The Western Vikings started raiding England. And then they started expanding where they raided. And before you knew it, they were just raiding all of northern and Western Europe. And in the process, they start to get some amazing victories. So you know, London Bridge is falling down, falling down. That's because it did. That's because my ancestors took out London Bridge. That song is based on a real event. Isn't that cool? I think it is. And so the Vikings actually end up conquering places like England. They get multiple kings of England. Cnut the Great, of course, the most famous. But there's also Svein Forkbeard. Isn't that a cool name? Svein Forkbeard. And they end up ruling this empire that stretches across Scandinavia and England. And they were doing all right for themselves. And they got their eyes on Paris. And they thought, you know what? Let's go take France. I don't know why not. We've got Latvia and Estonia and Finland and Ukraine, right? Because the Vikings, eventually the Ukrainian nobles couldn't figure out how to rule their lands. So they started hiring Viking mercenaries.

The group of Viking mercenaries they hired were the Rus, R-U-S. And the Rus eventually created Kievan Rus because they realized they were the only armed guys. And they didn't know why they were taking orders from anybody. And they just took over. And that's how Russia was founded. Isn't that crazy? Anyway, they almost got Paris. Long story short, they were on the island. They were battering down doors. They were scaling the walls. They almost got Paris. It was so close. And so after they failed to get Paris, the French came out. And they went, OK, that was too close. You almost got us. If you get a second shot, we don't think we're making it. So what do we do? We're not surrendering, surrendering. We're not giving you Paris. We're going to make you fight for it if you try to get it again. But we really don't want you to try again. We're going to meet you somewhere. And they make a deal with a guy named Rollo. And the deal is Northern France. They give Rollo Northern France. Now the Vikings, I told you, weren't called Vikings. They were called the Northmen, or depending on your language, Norsemen, or Nordmen, or Normans. And so the Vikings named Northern France after themselves. They called it Normandy. And they began ruling it. But they had a problem. And that was that the French peasants wouldn't learn German. They wouldn't learn to speak the dialects of German that the Vikings were speaking. They kept insisting on speaking French. And so the Norman nobility, Rollo, by the way, got Normandy in 911. The Norman nobility now has to learn French so that when they're abusing their peasants, the peasants understand the abuse. It doesn't help to shout at a peasant and then they don't understand you. You need them to understand. So they learn French. And what that does then is it sets us up for a really strange set of events. Somebody gets a great idea just a few decades later, 999, so 911 to 999, so 88 years later, to hire Norman mercenaries in southern Italy. And so Norman mercenaries start to travel from Northern France all the way to southern Italy. And they're being used by everybody. They're being used by the Romans, who are trying to hold on to southern Italy. They had it. They're losing it. They're trying to get it back. The Roman emperor at the time is a guy named Basil II. You want to laugh, but he was one of the greatest Roman emperors of the time period. And he went on a conquering spree and he starts carving up territory that the Romans had lost and he's putting it back in, including taking lands, Muslim lands. He actually brings the Roman Empire back to Syria and he captures Antioch and the northern end of Syria. The part of Syria that today is in Turkey is basically what he recaptured. So when the Ottoman Empire broke up, the Europeans showed up with a crayon and a napkin and they just began drawing borders. And you look at the border between Saudi Arabia and Jordan or Jordan and Iraq and you're like, why'd you do that? And they sneezed or something. Somebody got bumped and an extra wiggle line popped up. And they did that with Syria. They just chopped off the northern part and gave it to Turkey. So Basel II is re-carving the Roman Empire, but at the same time, there's all these forces pushing back and everybody's using Normans as mercenaries. That must have been awkward. You see your cousin on the other side. How much are you getting paid? And you fight for a little while. I'll pretend to kill you, OK? Don't swing at me. What eventually happens is those Normans go, why are we fighting for these other guys? And in 1030, the first Norman gets made a lord in southern Italy. And he slowly starts to conquer. And subsequent generations of Normans start to take pieces of southern Italy. And in 1061, the Normans are getting on ships and they're crossing over to Sicily. And they begin conquering Sicily. Sicily had been conquered by the Arabs two centuries earlier. The Normans also start getting hired by the Roman Empire in Anatolia, because they're being used to fight the Seljuks, who are coming west and fighting their way into Anatolia.

And so the Romans are using these Norman mercenaries in, I showed you the coin of Romanus IV. In 1071, Romanus IV has an army at a place called Manzikert. And they fight a battle against the Seljuks. And they're defeated. The Romans are defeated. The Normans take off after they were defeated. They just move out of the way. But the Romans get captured, including Romanus IV. He was taken. The Seljuks offered a ransom. The Romans are like, no, we don't ransom you. And they replaced him. The reason that mattered was the Norman commander, Russel de Baerl, decides he's going to do in Anatolia, in the middle of Turkey, by the way, Galatia. So right in the New Testament, Galatians, those are the letters that Paul writes to the Celts living in Anatolia. He decides he's going to carve out a little kingdom for himself in Galatia. And the Normans go on a conquering spree. And they make Ankara, Ankara, the capital of a Norman kingdom in the middle of Turkey. There are French-speaking Vikings ruling the middle of Turkey, which is historically populated by Celts. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. Historically populated by Celts, you know, kilt-wearing, bagpipe-playing Celts, because everything is actually intermingled and there's no boundaries. And the next thing you know, the Roman emperor is actually turning to the Seljuks and going, dude, can you help us with this guy? And the Seljuks, the ruler, the sultan, the sultanate of Rome, that's what they call themselves. Their flag was a two-headed eagle. The Roman flag was a two-headed eagle. Because when Emperor Romulus Augustus takes off his purple robes and sends it to Emperor Zeno, they've now unified the west and the east. They only have one emperor. So their new symbol for the Roman Empire is an eagle with two heads, one facing left, one facing right. Well, the Seljuks in Anatolia take that as their flag because their goal isn't to destroy the Roman Empire. It's to make a Muslim Roman Empire. Their goal is to eventually capture Constantinople one day. They don't hate the Roman Empire. They admire the Roman Empire. They want to be the Roman Empire. And so Suleiman I, the Seljuk sultanate of Rome, gets a request from the emperor, the Roman emperor, to go put down this Norman uprising. And he's baffled out of his mind. But yeah, sure, I'll help you. And in 1077, that Norman little kingdom vanishes. In 1084, the pope asks for an army to attack Spain. Spain was, at that time, majority-controlled by Muslims. The furthest north city that the Muslims owned in 1084 was a city called Barbastro. And so the pope asks for a Christian army to go to Barbastro and take it. One quarter of that army was a group of Normans. When they capture the city at first, they're pillaging it. They're slaughtering people. But the Normans decide they like the place and they stay. And the majority of the population is still Arab and it's still Muslim. And the Normans who stay start dressing like the Arabs. And they learn Arabic. And they're really digging Arab society. And they go Injun. And they go native. And it shocks everybody because it's like, wait, these French-speaking, blue-eyed, blonde Vikings are in Spain learning Muslim culture. And in a way, when you think about it, all three of these events that I just described are like little precursor crusades. In 1095, the pope holds two conventions. Both of them were in November. And Alexius Comnenus, Alexius I, the Roman Empire, comes to Italy. And this isn't a small thing because Italy isn't Roman. In fact, the pope in Rome and the Roman Empire have had a falling out that has lasted centuries. And they hate each other's guts a lot, not a little bit, a lot. So what happened was, as the Roman Empire was disintegrating, they managed to hold onto pieces of Italy, including the city of Rome. But the pope in Rome didn't like that because the original church had five patriarchs.

So the Orthodox Catholic Church. Orthodox is truth. Catholic is universal. So the Universal Truth Church, that was the original name of the Christian church. It had already had a schism. The Copts in Egypt had broken away in 284. But in the 700s, the church was still unified. But the pope in Rome came to resent the circumstances because the five patriarchs were the pope in Rome, the pope in Alexandria, the patriarch of Antioch, and the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Jerusalem. In other words, the original Christian church had five heads, two popes, two patriarchs, and an archbishop. By the way, pope came from the pope would have his child on his knee. And then people would come to kiss his ring. And they would hear the child saying, papa, papa. And it just stuck. Do you want me to say that again? The pope would have his child on his knee. You know, his kid. His kid, because the original Catholic Church didn't have a celibacy thing. They did the celibacy thing later so that they could make sure that the clergy didn't pass churches and church property down in their wills and illegitimate children in Europe couldn't inherit. So that's how that, that's why that happened. It wasn't to stop the popes from having babies. It was to stop the popes from having legitimate babies. It wasn't to stop the clergy from having families. It's just to stop the clergy from having legitimate families so they couldn't pass on church land. So anyway, in 756, the pope in Rome is sick of the fact that he's kind of second fiddle. He wants to be first fiddle. After all, it's Rome. It's Roman Empire. So he goes and he makes a deal with the Franks. And they break Rome out of the Roman Empire. It's Pope Stephen II who does this in 756. 763, Naples was still in the Roman Empire. Duke Stephen II, two different guys, same name, makes it easy to remember. 763, Naples breaks out of the Roman Empire and joins the pope in creating this papal state thing. Naples is never part of the papal states, but the idea that it's now going to be a separate thing from the Roman Empire, it breaks away. And the animosity between Rome and Constantinople just keeps growing and growing and growing until 1058. In 1058, they get into a spat that's so bitter and so nasty, they start to excommunicate each other. The patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates the pope. The pope excommunicates the patriarch. Next thing you know, they're interdicting. Interdicting is when you excommunicate whole cities, whole countries, whole regions, whole provinces. They start interdicting each other. And before they're done, Western Europe has completely interdicted Eastern Europe. And Eastern Europe has completely interdicted Western Europe. And the East took the truth, and the West took the universe. And that's why there's a Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, and a Greek Orthodox church. So when Alexios Komnenos goes to Italy in 1095, it's 37 years after they had just done this to each other. So the wounds are raw. They're fresh. And the reason Alexios Komnenos is there is he says, we're not making it. The sultanate of Rome has just taken almost all of Anatolia. We maybe have 10% of it left. We're finished to the east, which means all we have is a little piece of Southeastern Europe. We need your help. And Pope Urban II goes, you know what we should do? We shouldn't just help you a little bit. We should go all out. Let's retake the Holy Land and put it back in the Roman Empire. And Alexios Komnenos goes, yeah, why not? Let's do it. Let's make this happen. And so Pope Urban II comes out of those two talks, meeting with these top officials, including the Roman emperor, and says, I want an army to go to Jerusalem. We're going to conquer all of that and put it back in the Roman Empire. Let's go. 1096, a guy named Peter the Hermit gets up in front of everybody and says, we heard the pope loud and clear. Let's do this. And he puts together what's called the People's Crusade. It's basically just a bunch of peasants, some knights.

It's not the mercenary soldiers. It's not the knight. It's not all knights, right? It's just some peasants. They turn into a mob. And the first thing they do to sanctify the Crusades, this holy religious war, is they attack the Jews living in Germany. And the estimate is they murder about 2,000 Jews, and then they rape like 7,000 more Jews. And then they leave Germany on their way to the Holy Land to... I missed something. I feel like they read a piece of the New Testament that I... Did I? Where does it say that? Before thou goest on the crusade, holiest of holy, do what Jesus would have you do, slaughter Jews in Germany. Did I? And that is the first pogrom. That is the first documented case where Europeans, specifically post-Roman Empire, the Roman Empire hated Jews. Just like it was a hobby for them. They mostly did it in Palestine, right? It was just, ah, the Jews again. They keep throwing rocks at us. That's going to be ironic in a few centuries. So that's the first pogrom. 1096. That army works its way all the way to Constantinople. When it gets to Constantinople, Alexios Komnenos, they've been raiding the whole way because they need to feed themselves. So they're sacking villages. They're tearing into people's food stores. It's a disaster. It's a raiding mob. It shows up at Constantinople. Alexios Komnenos is like, I got to get rid of these guys as fast as I can. He goes, you know what you got to do? You got to cross the Bosporus. Here's my fleet. He puts them on a ship and he sends them across the Bosporus and they set up a camp. They actually attack a town. They capture it. And he's like, I'll send you food. You just stay on your side of the Bosporus. This is going to work out great. In the meantime, he's actually calling the Turks on the phone. Hey, there's some crazy dudes. I just deposited them on your end. Good luck with that. The guy who's now the son of Suleiman I, his name is Khalid Arslan. He decides he's got to get rid of these guys. And they want to take Nicaea. So Nicaea is pronounced Nicaea. I'm going to not say Nicaea again for the rest of the lecture. It drives me nuts. It's like Julius Caesar is Gaius Julius Caesar. Stop saying Julius Caesar. I feel like it could be a salad dressing or something. You know what I mean? It doesn't have to be the name of that guy. Nicaea was the capital for the Sultanate of Rome. So they actually put it almost across from Constantinople. And the reason is because that's their goal. It's Constantinople. They're nowhere near capturing it. They know that. But that's still, you know, it's nice to have a goal, even if it's a far off one. And so they've got Nicaea. It's like poison. And the mob, the peasant mob, the People's Crusade, as it's called, thinks it's going to capture Nicaea. And Clege Arslan basically sets up an ambush for them and slaughters them. And that's the end of the People's Crusade, for the most part. By the way, some of the leadership got away. Because, of course, that's how that usually works out. In any case, the real Crusader army doesn't show up until the next year. The real Crusader army is a mixture of nobles from across France and Germany, primarily, but also Italy, because there's Normans coming. So for our purposes, there's a bunch of Crusaders. There's too many. There's too many names. So I'm just going to simplify it a little bit. The Crusaders you need to know about are Bohemond of Toronto, not Canada, but Italy, and then his nephew, Tancred, and Godfrey de Bouillon, and Baldwin de Bologna. Baldwin and Godfrey are both from northern France. They weren't actually Normans, but they had definitely sided with the Normans. Their father, Eustace II, in fact, was with William the Conqueror in 1066 when the Normans decided to also conquer England. The Normans were very busy people. Oh, let's go to Spain. You know what? I southern it. Anatolia. England. In other words, long after the Vikings started speaking French, they're still tearing up the planet. They're on this permanent, multi-century rampage.

And it wasn't enough for them that they had captured England already twice. They wanted it a third time. They're like, this is good real estate. We want it back. And they got it. And so when Godfrey and Baldwin go on this crusade, they're not actually Normans, but they're part of the Norman sphere. So in a way, the top four of the five most important Crusaders are Normans. The fifth guy is a guy named Raimond. He's Raimond of Toulouse, also known as Raimond Saint-Gilles. He was Raimond the Fourth of Toulouse. And they show up. And Alexius, there's also Hugh de Vermandois. There's a few other guys. But I just want you to know those five. They show up at Constantinople. And they swear an oath of fealty. Well, not Tancred. He refuses. He wants nothing to do with this. And what they promise is that all the land they capture will be handed to Alexius Comnenus, the Roman emperor. And of course, they're lying through their teeth. They have no intention whatsoever of handing anything over. Their goal is to go in there, carve off land, and make their own little personal fiefdoms. They cross over the Bosporus with the Roman navy. It's 1097. Khalid Arslan isn't there to greet them. He's in southern Turkey fighting another Turk. And the reason is that Turk was trying to capture a city from an Armenian, Malatya. And Khalid Arslan was worried if Danishmen captured Malatya, it would put his position, it would weaken his position. So even though he's got this crusader threat on the west, he's so focused on his rivals that he's actually fighting them. He turns around when he realizes the crusaders have landed. He goes as fast as he can. By the time he gets there, Nicaea has already fallen. He convinces other Turks in the area to fight alongside him. They fight the crusaders at Doraleum. And they're defeated. And Khalid Arslan has to withdraw. And they just watch as the crusader army passes. The crusader army then goes through Armenia. So when the Roman Empire lost Anatolia, a piece of the Roman Empire broke away and didn't get captured by the Muslims and remained its own separate thing. It was oftentimes called Lesser Armenia. It was a little Armenian kingdom on what is today the southern coast of Turkey. And so the crusaders arrived there. Tancred was the kind of guy who would look at a situation and he would size it up real quick. He decides to basically conquer it. And he just goes and grabs all the strategic points in Lesser Armenia. And in the process, he's running into Baldwin. Baldwin has the same idea, but he's a little slower. So he keeps arriving after Tancred has done this. And the problem then is Baldwin has the bigger army. So he shows up and Tancred has a problem. Do I fight my fellow crusader, who's basically telling me he's taking my thing from me, or do I walk away? So the first time he walks away, the second time he fights. The crusaders have barely started the crusade and they're already fighting each other. Not many people die for the record. I want to say it was like two guys died and a few dozen are wounded. And then they call off the fight and they negotiate and they make a deal. But still, you can see there's already problems. They get over the mountains, the Tarsus Mountains, and they arrive at Antioch. Antioch is the first prize. So Antioch had only just been captured by the Muslims in 1084. So by the time that the crusaders have arrived, it's 1098. They set up a siege. But Baldwin decides, ah, not interested. And he takes off to the east and he goes to a city called Edessa and he puts Edessa under, he tries to capture Edessa. He doesn't put it under siege. He tries to capture Edessa. And Edessa was ruled by Armenians. And so Baldwin goes to the Armenians and he starts working out a deal with them. The leader of the Armenians in Edessa was a guy named Thoros. And Baldwin talks Thoros into adopting him and then letting him marry Thoros' daughter so that he will become now the heir to Edessa. And Thoros goes, okay. Well, Armenian culture was that when you, presumably, one of the chroniclers says this.

I'm not sure it's actually true. That's one of the problems you always have when you're reading historical accounts. You're always like, mm, did that really happen? According to the chronicler, Armenian culture was when you got adopted, your adoptive father and mother wore a really big gown and then you would take off your top, you'd have pants on, and then you would crawl under the gown, but they're completely naked under, and you hug them. Anyway, so apparently that's what Baldwin did with Thoros and his wife. And then he waited around for a while until a mob grabbed Thoros and his wife and hanged them. And that's the birth of the first crusader state. We now have the county of Edessa. Baldwin is the first crusader lord to rule a chunk of territory. I think it was May 1098. In the meantime, the siege in Antioch is still going on. Bohemond is the guy who wants Antioch for himself, but so does Raimond. So there's now two crusaders both pushing for it, but the problem is they still gotta capture it first. They haven't captured it. The guy who was the ruler of Antioch was a guy named Yarhisian. And Yarhisian starts putting out feelers to see if he can get help to break this, the crusader siege. And there's two guys nearby. There's the guy who's running Damascus, because even though they're part of the Seljuk Empire, the Seljuk Empire is already coming apart at the seams. The Seljuk warlords don't like each other. They don't cooperate. They see each other as rivals. They're constantly backstabbing each other. And the guy in charge of Damascus is a guy named Dukak. And Dukak's brother, Ridwan, is the guy in charge of Aleppo. They hate each other's guts. They see each other as rivals. So Yarhisian sends for help from Dukak. Dukak takes an army, and he has to go past Aleppo, right? And he's coming up past Aleppo. He gets to line of sight of the crusader army. He panics. He turns around, and he heads back to Damascus. So Yarhisian is like, oh, what do I do? I guess I have to talk to Ridwan. But he doesn't want anything to do with Ridwan, because Ridwan has a group of allies that he didn't like. The Hashishans. The Hashishans were Shia who decided they didn't like the direction Islam was going in. Sunnis were systematically winning. The Seljuks were Sunnis. And the Seljuks had replaced the Buyids, who were Shia, and had been defeating the Fatimids, not replace them. The Fatimids were also Shia. And so there is this guy, Hassan al-Sabah, who decides he wants to take a different approach to fight for the Shia cause. And that different approach is he's going to get into political intrigue, spying, and assassinating people. And Hashishan is where we get the word assassin from. Now, whether or not they used Hashish, we don't really know. That could have been the chroniclers trying to make a story up. In any case, Hassan al-Sabah's followers were total fanatics. And Ridwan, the ruler of Aleppo, was totally into them. And they were friends. And they were working together. And so this scares Hashishan. So he doesn't really want anything to do with this. He asks Ridwan to send an army. And Ridwan does pretty much the same thing Dukak does. And nothing comes of it. So Hashishan realizes he's running out of food. He's running out of time. But so are the crusaders. The crusaders are literally starving to death. They've been traveling for months. It's a year now. And they're running out of supplies. And they've been slaughtering their horses along the way. For food purposes, they're down to like 800 horses. And probably half the crusader army is already gone by this point. Some of them died. Some of them got sick. Some of them broke a leg. Some of them just were like, you know what? I don't need this. And they turned around and they headed home. So now, you can see on the inside, Antioch is desperate because he's trying to figure out how he's going to get through this. And the crusaders like Bohemond and Rahamund are trying to figure out how they're going to get in the walls.

And at that point, another guy jumps into the story. And the other guy is the ruler of Mosul, Karbuka. Karbuka, this Yahishan convinces Karbuka to come with an army. But Karbuka has to pass Edessa on the way. And he's looking at Edessa. And he goes, this Baldwin has it. I want it. And so he stops his army. For three weeks, he parks it outside of Edessa. And then he decides he can't take it. And so he abandons the siege. And he heads to Antioch. But by the time he gets to Antioch, his generals are working against him. And so there's all this intrigue going on before he even gets to Antioch. But even though he's still heading to Antioch, it's kind of too late. Because in the meantime, because he took so long, because he added those three weeks, there was a guy named Firuz. Firuz was accused of dealing on the black market even though he knew and was a friend of Yahishan. And so he gets charged a heavy fine. He's so furious about this that he decides to betray his own people. Firuz tells the crusaders, I'm going to let you in to the city. The crusaders are like, why would we believe you? This is probably a trap. He goes, I'm going to give you my son. If it's a trap, kill my son. Crusaders are like, really? OK. Why are you doing this? He goes, I want land, gold, and vengeance. They go, OK. We can give you all three of those. And so in the night, he had access to a window that looked out over the walls. And he just dropped a really long rope down. And the crusaders came up the rope one at a time till there were about 500 guys inside the city. And they began fighting for the gate. Yahishan hears the sound. He panics. He jumps on a horse. And he rides off. He leaves his son and wife and family behind. He just takes off. He doesn't even assess the situation. He just figures, it's over. I'm out of here. He rides for days. He finally collapses from riding. His entourage try to put him back on the horse. They can't get him back on the horse. He's having a depression bout or something. He just lays on the side of the road. A peasant walks by, recognizes who he is, and cuts his head off and takes it to the crusaders and gets a reward. In the meantime, Yahishan's son, Shams al-Daula, son of the state, sun as in the thing in the sky, not child. Shams al-Daula, isn't that a cool name? Who would name their kid that? Anyway, Shams is beautiful, but of the state? Anyway, he's got the citadel, and he's holding on to it. He's like, OK, they've got the city. But he's also watching what the crusaders are doing in the city. They're not kind conquerors. They're not walking through and going, oh, hi, everybody. How's it going? They are murdering everybody. They're just going through the streets, slaughtering the inhabitants of Antioch. They're killing the men. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the poor. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the women. They're killing the babies. They're leaving nobody. And Shams is up there in the citadel going, what? Who are these people? Why are they doing this? Why wouldn't you want the city intact, somebody to tax, somebody to work for you? Why are you slaughtering the city? And there's nothing you can do about it except resist and hold on to the citadel. That's when Karbuka's army shows up. Too late. Shams actually sneaks out of the city to go meet with him to try and coordinate what's going to happen next. How are they going to fight for the city? Because he hasn't given up. Karbuka fires him on the spot. He goes, you're done. You're not going back to the citadel. He then sets up his army to fight. But the princes who are with him fear, Dukak and Ridwan, that if he succeeds, he will then be able to establish authority over Aleppo and Damascus. And so they actually pull off the field and start heading home. And when the rest of his army sees this, they lose heart. The crusaders see what's happening. They see them pulling away. So they come running out of the gate because the crusaders had just found the lance that speared Jesus.

The Romans check to see if he's dead by spearing him. Because if fluid comes out, it means he's drowned in his own fluids. Because that's the goal of crucifixion, is to drown you slowly. And they found the lance that did this. It's not probably, right? Probably what happened was a monk took a lance and buried it and said, I'm pretty sure it's somewhere around here. You guys should dig for it. They dig. They find it. They're like, it's a miracle. And they come charging out of the city towards Kabuka's army. His army's morale has collapsed. His morale has collapsed. They just turn and run away. And the crusaders don't pursue them because they think it must be a trap because they can't figure out why the larger army just ran away for no reason. And then they have their city. There's a brief struggle between Raimond and Bohemond. Bohemond wins. And Bohemond gets to keep Antioch. And then the rest of the crusaders go, we're not here for Antioch. We're here for Jerusalem. Let's keep going. Bohemond goes, I'm good. I got what I wanted. I just wanted one of the richest cities on the planet. Although it's not rich anymore because you just killed its inhabitants. Anyway, I don't understand. They start marching to Jerusalem. The next city they come upon is a town called Ma'ara. When they arrive at Ma'ara, the population fights as hard as they can. So it's soldiers and citizens holding onto the city as hard as they can. But eventually the crusaders get in and they capture the city. When they do, the crusaders murder all 20,000 inhabitants and eat them. So there's multiple sources that say this on both sides. It's always good to have both sides saying it. I know of three sources that are from the crusader side that say they ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. And they describe it in slightly different ways, but it's mostly the same. One of them says that they spit at the adults and the children and just roasted them over a fire. Another one says that they would cut chunks of flesh off of them and then roast the individual pieces over a fire. But it's pretty widespread agreement that the crusaders ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. But there's a lesson in this story that applies to today. So one of the things people will do who want to defend an indefensible position is they'll find something to nitpick. So one of the crusaders says that the people were tortured first, one of the crusader chronicles. But none of the Muslim chronicles say that the people were tortured first. And so what I've seen happen, even on BBC, is somebody will say, well, they may have eaten the people, but they didn't torture them. So first of all, I think if you slaughter 20,000 people, including the children in front of the parents, that's torture. But then second, I kind of don't care if that crusader's chronicles said there was torture and there wasn't or not, because I still think there was a horrible crime committed here. Why are you focusing on that one thing? So no Muslims are saying there was torture. Only one crusader was saying there was torture. Nobody's having an argument with you, dude. There's no, sure, there's no torture. They just killed them and ate them. The reason I'm bringing this up is you see this kind of nitpicking. Like, for example, with the Holocaust, Holocaust deniers, I have seen, focus on the number. So for the record, it wasn't 6 million Jews. It was probably 5.1 to 5.4. 6 million is a slight exaggeration. It's not a big exaggeration, but it's a slight exaggeration. So the Holocaust deniers would focus on the number. Well, it wasn't 6 million. If you just take the 5.1, you took away their ability to do this. And now you can, well, how about the 5.1? And then there's nowhere they can go, because that's the number. The 5.4 is also a number, possibly. But just go with the low. 5.1 is already a horrific, nightmarish, hellish, evil. It doesn't have to be 6. You see what I'm saying? It doesn't have to have been torture. We're good with it just being cannibalism.

So be careful when you're arguing, when you're dealing with people. What is that called? I feel like it's distraction. It's not gaslighting. It's a little different thing. It's like, yeah, but what about? Anyway, the Crusaders then approached Tarabulus, Tripoli. It was one of the wealthiest cities on the planet at the time. So was Antioch, by the way, but not anymore. Tarabulus had a library in it with 100,000 books. It was ruled by a qadi, as opposed to a guy who took the title of maybe king or something. It was ruled by a guy who had the title, basically, judge, which is kind of cool. And the city was rich. It had these big walls around it. The Crusaders set up a siege. There was no point. There was no way they were getting in. So they bypass it. And then they decide, you know what? Let's just keep bypassing. We have Antioch. We have Edessa. We have Ma'ara. Let's just go straight to Jerusalem. Why are we capturing anything else? So they bypass Beirut. They bypass Arsuf, Acre. They just don't deal with any of it. Sur, Fayda, they go straight to Jerusalem. When they get there, they immediately attack it. They don't have any ladders. They don't have any siege equipment. This city has a wall on it. It has a citadel. So the Crusaders just go like a mob, charging up to the thing. And they're like banging on. And the defenders are pouring oil on them, shooting them with arrows, going, they can't get in here. Why are they doing this? And hundreds of them are wounded and killed for no effect. So then the Crusaders set up a siege. The problem is that Jerusalem is brilliantly designed to not be siegeable. So all the sprigs are inside the wall. So the area around it is arid. So the army stuck trying to besiege this thing basically has to run a water line to the Jordan River and by bucket bring the water to the army. That's a tough thing to do. But that's what they're going to do. And they're praying. They're hoping that God will intercede and give them a break. And it may not have been God, but it was the Genovese. The Genovese show up with some English volunteers by ship. And the Genovese brought the material needed to build siege equipment. They build the siege equipment, and they attack the city. So a little bit of, I'm going to bring in another actor, another player. So Egypt had been taken over by the Fatimids. The Fatimids were Shia who had started in North Africa. They took over Egypt. By the way, they found Cairo, 969. Cairo is just barely over 1,000 years old. It's such a baby for the Middle East, right? Middle Easters go, oh, you're 1,000? Oh, you're so young. You're so young. Your whole life is ahead of you. Of course, Cairo is a mega massive city. It's the sixth largest metropolitan area on the planet. There's only three metropolitan areas on the planet that aren't in Asia that are in the top 10. Cairo, Sao Paulo in Brazil, and Mexico City are the three that aren't in Asia. Everything else is Shanghai and Tokyo and Calcutta. You know what I mean? So the Fatimids are doing all right, but something really weird is happening. The Fatimids hated the Seljuks, but the Fatimids liked the Romans. They were allies. So when this whole crusade thing happened, in the mind of the Fatimids, who had just lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks a few years earlier, what's going to happen is the crusaders, who are technically in the service of the Roman Empire, are going to split that land. Syria will go to the Romans. Palestine will go to Egypt. That's what they're thinking is going to happen. So they decide, let's go grab Jerusalem from the Seljuks before the crusaders arrive to do our part in this alliance. They have an explicit alliance with Rome. This isn't like they're speculating. This is the deal that they've made with Alexios Komnenos. And so they send an army. They defeat the Seljuks. They capture Jerusalem. And then they send an envoy to meet with the crusaders. And the crusaders just keep coming. And the Egyptians are like, what are you doing?

No, no, you stay on that side. That's the deal. We're going to split this. And the crusaders just keep coming. And it becomes clear to the Fatimids, they're going to fight. They're allies. So they dig in. And that's when the siege equipment comes and the crusaders break in. And the Egyptian general in command of the defense of Jerusalem, Iftikhar, is looking at this going, how do I fight this now that the crusaders have a sectional wall? And so he retreats his men to the citadel. Once they're in the citadel, there's nothing he can do for the population of Jerusalem. All he can do is he can hold on. It's basically a thorn in their side. He's going to make it so that the crusaders can't control Jerusalem, but they can control parts of Jerusalem. And he won't control any of the merchant part of Jerusalem, the commerce part of Jerusalem. He'll just have a military piece. And eventually, he'll run out of supplies. And their goal is to fight to the death. There's no point. They saw what happened at Ma'ara, and they saw what happened at Antioch. They know who the crusaders are. They're supposed to be allies. They're being backstabbed. They get it. But the crusaders really want the city. And so they start negotiating. And the deal that they come up with, Raymond Saint-Gilles comes up with, is the following, that the Egyptians will leave in groups of five. They'll leave the citadel, and then they'll exit the city five at a time. That way, if the crusaders break their word, turn on them, they'll only kill those five dudes who are in the middle of leaving. And then the guys that are still in the citadel, they can just keep fighting. And anybody who escaped has already escaped. And that's the deal. So the first five go, and then another five, and another five. And you know the last five were like, oh, god, you know they're going to turn on us. But they don't. And the last five get away. And then the crusaders go over to the gate, and they close it. They go over to the Muslim quarter, and they just begin murdering everybody. They're just walking through the city, slaughtering person after person. Tancred, the guy that I talked about, with the strategic mind who kept running into trouble with Baldwin until Baldwin took Edessa, he can't take it. He's like, what are we doing? He runs over to a group of Muslims who were running. And he's like, whoa, whoa, I'm not going to kill you. He hands them his banner. And he says, if crusaders approach you, say you're with Tancred. And show them my banner, and they won't harm you. And they're, of course, grateful. And then he just sort of runs around the city trying to figure out what to loot and how to save people's lives. He hasn't given up the looting. Don't be naive about this. But he's also like, let's not just murder everybody. And he describes in his own memoir, later on coming upon that group of Muslims laying there dead on his bloody banner. The crusaders didn't even care. They're just like, you're with Tancred? A group of Muslims realize there's no surviving this. This is over. So they decide, let's go to the mosque. Let's die praying. And so they barricade themselves inside the mosques. The crusaders eventually smash the doors open. They slaughter everybody inside. They get buckets of water. They wash the blood out. They go to the top of the minaret. They break the crescent moon off, and they stick a cross on top. They say a prayer. Boom. Insta-church. Then they go to the Jewish quarter. Because see, Jerusalem was in four quarters. A Muslim quarter, two Christian quarters, and a Jewish quarter. Why are the crusaders here? So that Christians can own Jerusalem. Because clearly they could be there if they had half the city. Not interesting. So they go to the Jewish quarter. And the Jews know what's coming. It's not rocket science here. So they just start running to synagogues. They figure, you know, let's do like those Muslims did. We'll die in prayer. The crusaders believed that Jews were so horrible, so evil, you couldn't wash out the synagogue afterwards and turn it into a church.

So they just piled wood around the synagogues and burned them to the ground, burning the Jews inside alive. And then they go to the two Christian quarters. And of course, at this point, the Christian population is peeing itself. Because it's just watched half the city get exterminated. And they go, you have the true cross, where is it? And the Christians go, we're not telling you. You're savages. And the crusaders go, OK, we got you. And they start murdering the Christian clergy. They're like, who's a priest? Let's have your priest. And they just start slaughtering the priests. They're like, when we're done, we're going to do the deacons. And then we're going to start working on your families. Eventually, somebody tells them, here's the true cross. Please stop killing us. And they stop massacring the Christians as well. But then they turn to the Christians and go, remember that great schism in 1058? These Catholic priests are your new priests. Get used to it. We're not doing that anymore. Your orthodox ways are out. And they're like, yeah, whatever. And that's how the crusaders captured Jerusalem. Isn't that a heartwarming story? Is that too much sarcasm? At that point, the Egyptians are trying to figure out what to do. They send an army to Ascalon with the hope that they'll eventually be able to come back and fight to capture Jerusalem back. Godfrey is named the new ruler of Jerusalem. He does not take the title king. So he's just the ruler. We'll get to that later. He takes his army. He runs to Ascalon. And the Egyptians were in disarray. They weren't expecting this. And so they weren't set up properly. And he attacks them within their disarray. And a bunch of them fall back. They drop into the fortress. The rest of them escape. And the crusaders get another win. They don't capture Ascalon. But they definitely humiliate the Egyptian army and buy themselves some time. The Egyptians aren't done. Their leader is a guy named Al-Aftal Shahanshah. Now, Shahanshah is not Arabic. It's Persian. But Al-Aftal is. The best leader of leaders is his name. Dude, if you have that as your name, you need to get into politics. That's incredible. That's incredible. Anyway, so Al-Aftal is actually a slave. Isn't that weird? And he's actually Armenian. So the guy running the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt, it has a caliph, a khalifa. It has a Shia khalifa. The guy running it is actually an Armenian slave. There's an actual khalifa who's a Shia Arab. But the guy running it, the wazir, is an Armenian slave named the best leader of leaders. And he's like, we're not doing this. He sends an army. They attack Ramla. Godfrey is dead. Godfrey dies. We don't know why. There's one person says that he was killed in battle. Another person said he got sick. Another person said he was poisoned. Godfrey's dead. He was literally the ruler of Jerusalem for a year. He's replaced by Baldwin, the guy that captured Edessa. He comes down. It's his brother. So the chronicler said that when Baldwin received the news, he was very happy, but also a little sad that his brother had died. And he comes down, and he's crowned king. And that's the moment in the year 1100 that the kingdom of Jerusalem is officially going, because there's now a king. But Godfrey was at 1099 when they captured Jerusalem. He meets Al-Afdal at Ramla in 1101. And he defeats the Egyptian army. The Egyptian army withdraws. They come back the next year, because Al-Afdal is not going to give up easily. They attack Ramla. And this time, they beat the crusaders. The crusaders fall to Jaffa. And in the second battle at Jaffa, the crusaders win again. The Egyptians withdraw. They come back in 1105 to do it again. They attack Ramla. And they're defeated a third time. And the Egyptians give it a rest. They're like, OK, we're exhausted losing. In the meantime, something really critical happens for the purposes of how the crusades are going to unfold. And it's the Battle of Haran. So Haran used to be called Karhaye.

Karhaye is where the Romans fought the Persians for the first time in 53 BC. And the Romans were, I mean, just summarily defeated. It was a catastrophe. 26,000 Romans against 8,000 Persians. And the Persians maybe lost like 100, 150. And the Romans lost like 13,000 dead, 10,000 captured. So the crusaders are going to do another Karhaye, only the city's been renamed Haran. And the Muslim army comes out to meet it at Haran. It's southeast of Edessa. And the crusaders are defeated. They are beaten in the field. And in fact, one of the crusaders is captured. His name is Baldwin. But it's a different Baldwin. It's not the king of Jerusalem. It's his cousin. I think it's his cousin. And his cousin's name was Baldwin Borsk. That's what's in my, Borsk, I think is what it was. And he's become the count of Edessa when Baldwin becomes the king of Jerusalem. And so he goes into captivity. And he's stuck in captivity for four years. And while he's in captivity, Bohemond himself also gets captured. And he ends up in captivity. So there's two crusaders that are now out of the picture because they've been captured. And then Raimon decides he wants Terabolus. So Raimon was probably supposed to become the king. But for whatever reason, he decided he didn't want to be the king of Jerusalem. He wanted to be the king of Terabolus. So what he did was he set up a siege for Terabolus after they captured Jerusalem in 1102. And he's built a fortress north of Terabolus. And he's fighting day after day. The defenders of Tripoli come out late in 1104. They set his fortress on fire. Raimon himself is severely injured in the fire. He survives it but dies like three or four months later from his wounds. So the crusaders have now lost basically three, four of their top crusaders. Godfrey is dead. Raimon is dead. Bohemond is in captivity. Baldwin, spoiler alert, who will become Baldwin II, who will become the second king of Jerusalem, is in captivity. So that's a weird story, obviously. And so they're in trouble. By this point, most of the crusaders have actually gone home. In other words, if the Muslims had just attacked in an organized fashion at that moment, there was nothing to stop them from just taking it all back. But the Muslims are in such disarray. And each of these Turkish warlords, these Seljuk warlords, hates each other's guts so much they just won't cooperate together. It gets so weird that at some point, 1108, there's going to be a battle. Baldwin gets released. And Baldwin is going to make a deal with the ruler of Mosul. And he's going to field an army. So it's going to be a crusader army next to a Seljuk army. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight against each other. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight Tancred. Tancred ended up becoming the regent of Edessa while Baldwin was in prison. Tancred doesn't want to give it up. He doesn't want Baldwin to come back. Tancred goes and he gets Ridwan, the guy from Aleppo. So there's a Tancred. The crusader has a Muslim ally. And they're next to each other in the field. And they're going to fight a battle against a Muslim crusader army. And by the way, they defeat Jawali and Baldwin. They have to escape. And Tancred basically keeps Edessa as a result. He's eventually talked into participating in the siege of Tarabulus. They're going to actually try and take it once and for all. And when he does that, he reconciles with Baldwin. But here we are. It's 1108. The crusaders just captured Jerusalem nine years earlier. And there's a battle where there's Muslims and crusaders on both sides fighting each other. Like, it's already gone sideways in every way you can imagine. And that's the first part of the Crusades. Having said that, there's so much more to this story, which is what I warned you from the beginning. Like, I am not going to get through the Crusades. I literally got you to 1108. By the way, my goal was 1125. But I think I'm basically out of time. So I'm surrendering and accepting I'm not going to get to my goal.

But to put things in perspective, the second crusade is 1145. The kingdom of Jerusalem is going to go down in a ball of flames. In case you didn't know that, I hope I didn't spoil this for you. But in 1187, after the Battle of Hattin. So then the third crusade is after that. And then there's a fourth crusade in 1202. And so in other words, the Crusades are just going to keep going for a while. And they actually don't end by most people's. The usual number we use is 1291. So it's 195 years. I've just covered nine of it. Well, 12 if you include the, well, even more. 13 if you include the peasant crusade. By the way, there's supposedly a children crusade in this. It's a lot of fun. The Crusades were great. I'm going to tell you the children crusade. I'm going to let you go. It happens later. So this is out of time sequence. But it's just too fun since I mentioned it. A group of children think if they go and just show up in Jerusalem, the Muslims will give it back. Because this is after the Battle of Hattin. So they don't, children obviously walking from France to Palestine is a little tricky. So what they do is they walk to Venice. And they show up. And they ask, will you, the Venetian Navy, just take us? And the Venetians go, yeah, of course. It would be our sacred duty to take you. And the children are never heard from again. They were sold into slavery. The Venetians just put them on the ships, took them to slave markets, and just. Isn't that just capitalism? I'm pretty sure that's just capitalism. All right. Thank you for your time. And if you want to come see my show and tell, I'll stick around to let you do that. And actually, you know what? I'll field a question. And then I'll let you go. How about that? I always forget to do that. I actually don't always. No? No questions? OK, good. We're done.

I have some stuff I want to do before I jump in, and I also want to talk about what I'm going to do when I jump in so that it's not a complete surprise. So one of the things I want to do, I have a lot of trouble with, which is it's self-promotion. So I'm going to pass these around, these are just bookmarks. It's advertising my novel, and I brought a copy of my novel. So I have a novel, and it's The Blood Throne of Caria, and the reason I'm pushing it, and it makes me feel dirty doing this, so I'm probably just off a little bit, is because I'm ramping up to try and put out another novel, and if I can get a little bump in sales before that happens, it helps me. So if you like that kind of stuff, get my novel. That kind of stuff is historical fiction. I'm particularly obsessed with basically everything from Iran to Italy. That's like my zone where I obsess about. This is set in the 6th century, 5th century, 5th century B.C. in the southwest corner of Turkey. And it's about a real person, so it's historical fiction, but she doesn't have, her name is Artemisia, she doesn't have a lot of, how should we say this, there's a lot of attacks done on her by historians, and so my goal in writing this novel was to figure out what was true and what was a lie, and then correct the lie. But I can't claim it's the truth because it's speculation on my part, so hence historical fiction. Somebody's going to ask at some point what they should read. This is a fun way to start, it's The Crusades Through Arab Eyes, wouldn't that be a novel idea, by Amin Malouf. It's an old book, it's 1985 if I remember correctly, but there, now I've done that part. I also want to dedicate this talk to a group of people, so it's a small list, but I just want to do this. Omar, Saeed, Iman, Iman, Iman, and then Hadi, I'm probably forgetting somebody else I intended. You know what, I'm going to throw Jayden into the mix, he'll be like, oh my god, I can't believe you threw my name in there. I actually have a, I was just gifted a piece of rock from Palestine from the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and so I'm probably going to hold on to it the entire talk because, well, my talk is going to take place in Palestine mostly, so this is kind of a strange thing to have right now. Also, let's see, what did I do with it, I probably already lost it. I brought show and tell, but it won't work because the camera is too small and you're sitting too far away. I actually brought coins from the time period, so I will, after the talk, you can come up and look at it, and then what I'll do is we'll put, for the people who are watching this on video, I'll just put pictures up on it, but just to give you an idea of what I have, this is a coin from William II. It's after the period I'm talking about today because I'm not going to get to him. William II was the king of Sicily. The year in my head is 1153, but who knows. Anyway, the reason I brought it was because I am going to talk about the Normans, and I'm going to talk about Sicily a little bit for background purposes, and I kind of wanted to stick this in your head a little bit. On one side, the coin is written in Latin. On the other side, it's written in Arabic because the Normans took Sicily from the Arabs, and so they just made it so that they were a bilingual society. This, let me see, hold on, I'll do this one here. This coin is going to matter because this is Romanus IV, the Roman emperor. I'm going to talk about him in a little bit of detail, just briefly, because he's going to set things in motion that make the rest of the story possible, and then when you look at the coin, you'll see that the quality of the coin dramatically falls when you get to Alexios Komnenos. Alexios Komnenos becomes the Roman emperor just like 11 years later, and the quality of the coin is terrible compared to this one, so it makes you realize how far into decline the Romans had fallen. One of the things I'm going to do is I'm going to do a little bit of background, and in the process of doing the background talk, I'm going to bring up the birth of the Arab Empire.

We don't know what year this coin was minted because it doesn't have a year on it. It's actually a counterfeit coin. The Arabs, when they made their empire, needed coins, and they went and stole a Roman mint, and they began minting coins, Roman coins, so it has Latin letters on the back. It has three Roman emperors, well, an emperor and his two sons on the front. They're holding in one hand a cross, and in the other hand a globus cruciger with a cross sticking out of it, so there's literally six crosses on this coin, and this is the Arab Empire, one of the Arab Empire's first ever coins. It was minted during the Rashadin period. We don't know a date, so I can't tell you who, but most likely it would have been Uthman ibn Affan or the Khalifa Ali ibn Abi Talib. It's probably not one of the earlier two, and then this coin is Muawiyah I. He did the same thing. It's a Roman emperor with two crosses in his hand, and on the back, Latin letters, and one of the reasons why I wanted to sink that into your heads is to also show how the boundary between things is really blurry, right? We're a society of people who want to put everything into categories, including ourselves. We can't wait to label ourselves, and we keep breaking it down further and further, and the reality is these categories are all imaginary and made up. Nobody is that easy to categorize, you know what I mean, let alone whole societies, especially societies where everything is blurred together. I probably have said Arabic words, for example, that are English in this. I wasn't paying attention, but you know, at one point I might say the word nadir or zenith or zero, and then by contrast, Arabic is filled with Latin words. For example, the word faloos, the word for money, comes from pholos. It literally was, one of those coins was a pholos that I was holding up, and so the word is actually Latin. It's not Arabic. It's just the Arabs used the Latin word. Cres, the word for cherries, comes from crassinus, which is the Latin word for cherry, and it can go on and on because everything is stuck together. All right, so as Eric Deggans would say, I'm going to do a bunch of table setting. Eric Deggans is a TV critic that I listen to on NPR, and he recently complained about too much table setting, but I don't know how to not do table setting, and the reason I have to do the table setting is if I just jump into the Crusades and start talking about it, it'll be entertaining because there's a lot of violence. Like, if you enjoy People Massacred, and I know you do because I watch the same movies you do, then this is a great story because it is gory, but it's kind of helpful to know why it happened, and how did we even get into the situation where it was possible. So I can't skip that. Having said that, I have no intention and no belief that I can, even if I wanted to, cover the entire Crusades. So in other words, this is part one. You're just setting this up now. I will try to do the entire Crusades, but I'm betting I'm going to have to do four parts. One of the reasons I don't know is, some of you have figured this out about me, I don't write my lectures out, so I actually don't know what I'm going to say until it starts happening, and so as a result, I don't know how the timing of this is going to land, so it'll be fun. I'm exploring this with you, and we'll see where it goes. It'll probably be a train wreck, and people will hate it, but it'll be fun for me anyway, and that's the important thing. All right, so, to do this, I need to introduce some actors. The first actor I want to introduce is probably the most important actor in the story, and it's the Arabs. And the reason they're the most important, obviously, is because the Crusaders are going to invade the Arab world to fulfill their goal of making a kingdom of Jerusalem. So, the Arabs created an empire that most people don't refer to, don't talk about, that's basically been deleted from history. It's the Arab empire, although I've frequently heard it referred to as the Muslim empire.

The reason you need to not do that and call it the Arab empire is the Arab empire was created by Arabs, like the Roman empire was created by Romans. We don't call it the pagan empire, and when it becomes Christian, we don't call it the Christian empire, right? When it becomes Japanese, we don't call them the Shinto Buddhist empire, you know what I mean? When Alexander the Great made his empire, we don't call it the pagan empire. So, why would we do this in this one particular case? And what I'm going to pose to you is the reason we usually don't even name it, and if we do, we sometimes call it the Muslim empire, is because of anti-Arab hate. We have that running through the core of our society, the core of our civilization, and one of the reasons is because of the events that led to the Crusades and the Crusades themselves. In other words, by doing anti-Arab hate, you're perpetuating this old wound. It's time to let it go. Although, by the time we're done tonight, you'll be like, oh my gosh, what's that about? So, it'll be good. The Arabs began making their empire, and by empire, I mean it in the true sense of the word empire. To be clear, a state that rules multiple countries and nations. That's all you need to be to be an empire. Having said that, you could claim that in the United Kingdom today, what's left of the great empire is still an empire, because Great Britain is Wales, England, and Scotland. That's three countries. And then, throw in Northern Ireland, Gibraltar, Bermuda, and the Falkland Islands and Malvinas, and you end up with multiple countries, right? Or at least pieces of multiple countries. So, they began making their empire in 633, when the first Khalifa, Abu Bakr, launches his armies into the Persian and Roman Empires simultaneously, in what should have been a completely insane, impossible, can't-be-done event. And it's not only done, but by 711, the Arab Empire became the largest empire on the planet to that date. There have been larger empires since, but there had never been a larger empire before this. It stretched, by 711, from Spain to Pakistan. It went all the way into Central Asia. So, if you can conjure a map of the Roman Empire, it owned about 60% of the Roman Empire. Conjure a map of the Persian Empire, it owned 100% of the Persian Empire. And it went into Central Asia, and it went into India. Fine? For those of you, because I just said Pakistan, for those of you who don't know, the British cruelly and sadistically cut Pakistan out of India. Pakistan is India. It's just, you know how the Brits are. It's divide and conquer, wreck, destroy, ruin. India is named after the Indus River, which is 100% in Pakistan. It's just cruel. You know what I mean? Anyway, so, this Arab Empire, by the way, when it was born, it had a tiny Muslim population. But by 711, it had a few more Muslims. It was maybe 5-10% of the population was Muslim. The empire itself was majority Christian, 60% Christian. In fact, probably somewhere around 60% of the world's entire Christian population was in the Arab Empire. Isn't that hard to comprehend? The majority of the world's Christians lived in the Arab Empire, an empire that was majority Christian. In 711. So, the empire has been around that, right? From 633 to 711, it's already been around for a few decades. It's not like it was just born. One of the reasons why Muslims are such a small percentage of the population is they didn't convert by the sword. There was no compulsion to become Muslim. At first, what the Muslim conquerors did was they said, if you're Christian or Jewish, you worship the book. Therefore, you have a pathway to heaven. So, you have to be treated like a full human. But then, as they kept conquering, they kept running into other religions. And they just kept extending it. So, the Zoroastrians, okay, yeah, why not? And, right, centuries later, by the time they're in India proper, they're like, yeah, Hindus too, it's all good. We're going to make this work. Right?

That was what kept happening. By the way, the Arab Empire in 711 was probably about five, ten percent Buddhist, just to mess with you. Afghanistan had a giant Buddhist population. So, it seems counterintuitive, but there it is. That empire gets into a conversation with itself. And the conversation it has with itself stems from a problem that they had. The Arabs had never ruled themselves, let alone ruled an empire, right? Until this moment. 633, the year they launched the empire, is the year the Arabs, for the first time in history, ruled the entire Arabian Peninsula. So, they don't even catch their breath. They conquer the Arabian Peninsula, put it under a single state, and then they just go, they just keep going. Next thing you know, they've conquered the Persian Empire, and they've conquered the majority of the Roman Empire, and they're in France, trying to conquer France. What was the Battle of Tours? 732 is in my head, I hope that's not wrong. So, this empire has a problem. Arabs don't know how to run an empire. They've never run an empire before. Normally, conquerors are arrogant, and they're cruel, and they're sadistic. Like, take the Romans. So, I'm part Italian. So, for those of you that like being mean to Italians, a little bit, but it's okay. Gaius Julius Caesar, the guy you incorrectly called Julius Caesar, when he conquered Gaul, there were three million people living in Gaul. When he left, there was one million people living in Gaul. He murdered one million, he enslaved one million, and then he looked at the remaining million and went, welcome to the Republic. By the way, we'd like for you to worship our gods. Let's have your taxes now. Oh, and we're going to steal your technology. That's what conquerors often did, right? The Arabs, on the other hand, were humble about this, and they told the Romans and the Persians they had conquered, we don't know what we're doing, we don't know how to do this. We want to just leave you where you are. You're a bureaucrat, you're running this province, don't stop, and then we'll watch you. Maybe we'll figure it out, but in a few generations, hopefully we'll have this sorted out. In the meantime, I'm going to counterfeit this money over here. It's got crosses on it, but that's okay. I'm okay with that. I like Jesus. And that was kind of their conversation. So, the reason that matters is Muawiyah, I showed you the coin. Muawiyah I moves the capital after a civil war that lasts five years, that ends in 661. He moves the capital to Damascus from Medina. When he puts the capital in Damascus, he puts it in a former Roman city. And that matters, because it meant that the bureaucrats around Muawiyah are shaping the policies he's creating, and it orients the Arabs in the Arab empire west. It orients them towards the Romans. And in fact, he's going to lay siege to Constantinople. He won't capture it. But then a subsequent Arab the next century is going to do it again, and they'll fail a second time. Had they captured Constantinople on either of those two, they would have taken out the Romans too, because they had already conquered the Persians. Yazdegerd III was the last Persian emperor. He's gone. Persians are done. But the Romans are still hanging on. For the record, what saved the Romans was the emperor put out a contest. He said, anybody who can invent something that can save us, I will give you a sum of money. A Syrian refugee, isn't that cool? Isn't that weird, a refugee? I thought we were supposed to put them in cages. Anyway, a Syrian refugee invented a flamethrower. So what happened was the Roman Navy had a chain blocking the vulnerable north end of Constantinople. They had a chain that went across, so the Arab Navy couldn't get through it. And the Roman Navy was hiding behind the chain, this big chain. And the Romans pulled up the chain, and the Roman Navy started coming out. The Arabs are like, why are they coming? We'll just sink them. This is suicide. And the Romans came right up on them.

And the Arabs had no idea they had flamethrowers. And they just opened up and set the Arab fleet on fire. And that's how they saved Constantinople. Anyway, that's why you should never turn away Syrian refugees. That is the rule on that one. Or is the rule you should make them. Sorry, I went to a dark place. All right, so in 750, there's a coup d'etat. The Abbasids overthrow the Umayyads. And they move the capital to a brand new city that they've just built on a village. The village is called Baghdad. It's a Persian village. And they move the capital to this city. They rename it Medina Tassalam, the City of Peace. And they build this amazing fortress system. It's a two-layer fortress system. It's incredible. The city should be impossible to capture. And science and commerce and philosophy pour into the city. Art pours into the city. And the city grows really fast and becomes a major city really quickly. But it's in Iraq, which was Persian, not necessarily ethnically, by the way. There was a huge Arab population in Syria during Roman period and a huge Arab population in Iraq already. What I mean is it was the Persian Empire. But there were also a lot of Persians as well because they were intermingled. Because you've got to remember, this is a pre-nationalistic society. It's before people went, oh, my DNA is better than DNA by virtue of my race or by virtue of my nation. Back then it was, I was born in this city and that makes me better than you. It was city discrimination, which is fun. We have that a little bit. Like whenever a Houstonian walks up to you, you know he's from. Anyway, so this means that the conversation changes. Because now it's got a Persian orientation because the Abbasids are surrounded by Persian bureaucrats. And those Persian bureaucrats have two agendas. One, to shift the attention of the Arab Empire east. And two, to destroy it. That is their goal. They are going to break this thing. The reason is, is because most of the countries that the Arabs conquered adapted and began to speak Arabic. Or at least there was a large population slowly starting to speak Arabic. Like Arabic probably didn't become the major language in Egypt until about 900 AD. But there was already a population of people speaking Arabic for commercial purposes and for political purposes by this point. The Persians weren't learning Arabic. They were holding onto their identity and their language. They had converted to Islam, but they weren't going to convert to being Arab. So right, ethnically Egyptians aren't actually Arab. But culturally and linguistically, they're 100% Arab. I keep running into conversations with people like, well, Egyptians aren't real Arabs. Oh, do they still speak ancient Egyptian? I miss that. I mean, they do. If you go to a Coptic church and listen to the liturgy, they do it in Coptic. Coptic is ancient Egyptian. Ancient Egyptian is as alive in Egypt as Latin is in Italy. You can hear it. It's not dead dead. It's just mostly dead. Right? And so what it means to be Arab is really more of a linguistic thing than it is an ethnic thing. It's not a DNA thing. It's do you speak Arabic? Well, the Persians rejected that. They refused. They resisted. And so little by little, they start to pick at the Arab empire from within, because they're the bureaucrats running it now. And pieces of the Arab empire start to come off. If I remember correctly, the first piece comes off, well, the first piece comes off in 756. Spain. One of the Umayyads escaped the Abbasids. They massacred the Umayyads. They tried to kill all of them so there would be no rivals out there causing them problems. Well, one of them got away. He snuck through Egypt. He went across North Africa. He went to Spain. And in 756, six years after the Abbasid revolt, he pulls Spain out of the empire. And so the empire is already starting to come apart in 756. I think 727 is the next time a major piece comes out. And that's over in Persia. And little by little, the Arab empire starts to disintegrate.

Eventually, it will lose all of North Africa and Persia. And as it's shrinking, the khalifa, the system where you had a person who was a religious and a political authority, is starting to become symbolic. And they're being replaced by wazirs. They're being placed by ministers. And so there's actually now a secular leader who's running the show. And the khalifa is becoming a symbolic leader who's mostly just confined to a palace in Baghdad and has no meaningful role other than to walk around the garden looking pretty. And by the time that happens, it also means that the person who has the best position symbolically to unify people has no political power, which is bad if you're trying to hold things together. I can't give you an exact date when the Arab empire stops functioning. But it's pretty finished by 900. I've seen the year 833 used as well. I think you can have an argument about when that's happened. By the time the Buyids are running Baghdad, it's over. There's no two ways about it. The Buyids were Persians who had broken out Iraq and a huge chunk of Iran and were ruling it on their own. And of course, the reason that matters now is if there is going to be a European invasion down the road, there isn't an empire to stop it. Well, there will be, because I'm going to have to introduce another actor, and it's the Seljuks. In 1037, a group of Turkish warriors begin to conquer the Middle East. And they create an empire to replace the Arab empire. And that empire is the Seljuk empire. So for the record, Turks are from Central Asia. They are in the same cultural linguistic group as Mongolians, Koreans, and the Japanese. I'm going to let you sit on that one for a moment. I take that in. Japanese, Koreans, Mongolians, and Turks are the same cultural linguistic group. Do this as an exercise. Find a Turk and stand up next to a Korean and have the Koreans start speaking Korean and have the Turks start speaking Turkish. It is crazy cool. It is very, very super cool. You should totally do this experiment. You can. They exist here in Austin. Just start looking for them. The Turks are starting to move into the Middle East for multiple reasons, one of them being they're serving as mercenaries. Another one is they're just looking for land to inhabit. It's a migration. There are immigrants coming in. And by 1037, they're politically in a position where they start conquering. And they end up conquering a huge chunk of the Asian part that the Arab empire had. I'm making this number up because I never measured it. But they probably ended up with about 30% of the Arab empire, maybe a little bit more. Maybe a third of the Arab empire. Let me introduce another actor, the Roman Empire. So I've said this before in lectures. So people who have seen my previous lectures will probably be annoyed with me because I'm just repeating myself. But I have to a little bit because I'm going to assume that you haven't. And that way it makes sense. When I was a kid, when I was an adult, I was taught that the Roman Empire fell on September 4, 476 AD. This is one of my big pet peeves about the way we teach history. The Roman Empire did not fall on September 4, 476 AD. That's just a lie. There's nothing even remotely truthful about it. What happened on September 4 is Romulus Augustus, the Western Roman emperor, took off his purple robes, stuck it in a box with a note attached to the box that said, we don't need two emperors anymore. We just need one emperor. And he sent it to Emperor Zeno. Emperor Romulus Augustus was in Ravenna, Italy. That was the capital of the Western Roman Empire at that time. They had long since abandoned Rome. The city of Rome existed. It was largely empty, though. It had 1 and 1 half million people at its height. And at that point, there were 40,000 people. Can you imagine walking through the streets of a city that at one point had 1 and 1 half million people and there's only 40,000 people there? Talk about ghost town. What was that like?

And of course, most of those houses and buildings have collapsed, and they're in ruins. But still, that must have just been a trip. We were great ones. What happened to us? This is terrible. And then you look at the coins, and they were striking at the time. And you're like, dude, what happened to your artists? They all died, too? Find some artists. So what happened was the Roman Empire fell on May 29, 1453. So when you were a kid, probably this happened. It happened to me. People would go, we don't know why the Roman Empire fell. Maybe it was the gladiators. They stopped doing the gladiating like centuries earlier. So probably not. Maybe it was the orgies and the eating festivals. They also stopped doing some of that, too. I mean, they still had a little bit of that going. But not as much as they did during the Republic. That was the height of that. You know what I mean? That was the good old days. So that's probably not it. Lead pipes. If lead pipes was a problem, we're in trouble. I don't know if you know this, but we have lead pipes in the United States. All the urban centers have lead pipes, as Flint found out. So probably not the lead pipes, either. For the record, what happens is hard water calcifies the inside of the lead pipes, and then the lead is no longer a problem because there's basically a salt layer inside the pipe protecting you from the lead. But then your city council decides they don't have enough money. Why? Because we went through a tax-cutting frenzy because somebody went, taxes are evil. They pay for things like water. What do you mean taxes are evil? Roads. Where do you think roads come from? Schools. Schools are also taxes. Hospitals, scientific research, police departments, fire departments. It's not the Libertarian Ferry that delivers that stuff. That's taxes. Unless you're lucky and you had a bunch of oil, like Texas does. Anyway, but it's OK. We keep our electric grid functioning just as well as Egypt does. So that's amazing. It's fun living in a third world country again. You know what I mean? It's very familiar. I go to Mexico in the summer so I have electricity. Also, by the way, it's cooler. Push that through your brain. I still can't get over that. I'm very confused about that. So I've derailed myself. Why did I go down that path? So here's what happened. I was taught we don't know why the Romans collapsed. But we do know why the Romans collapsed. And the reason we know why the Romans collapsed is because I can actually tell you the exact day the Romans collapsed. I don't know what it's telling me. Actually, it's telling me you need to go. The Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453. The reason why the Romans collapsed on May 20, you thought I was kidding, the reason why the Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453, and I can tell you exactly why, is because an Ottoman army captured the last Roman capital, Constantinople. Constantinople was the last piece of Roman real estate. In other words, there's no mystery why the Romans fell apart, the Roman Empire fell apart. It fell apart because it was conquered. And we know the exact moment it was conquered. In other words, there's no reason to have doubt about the date that the Roman Empire fell. Here's what happened. There was a guy named Hieronymus Wulf. About a hundred years after the Roman Empire fell, and I want to say a hundred years, but that's probably wrong, somewhere around 1550, right? The Roman Empire fell 1453. He decided he was going to rewrite history on purpose and tell a really big lie on purpose. He had two goals. One, he wanted to divorce the Roman Empire from its ignominious defeat at the hands of the Muslims. The Roman Empire was a Christian empire. He was a Christian. He was a German. And he hated the idea that Muslims had conquered the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire had been defeated by Ottoman Turks. And so he decided he was going to move the date of the conquest of the Roman Empire to a hundred years earlier, lie to everybody, and people would accept the lie because it would divorce the end of the Roman Empire from the Muslims.

And then the second goal was, in 476, Odo Vakur, the German, declared himself the king of Italy. Now, to be clear, he left Italy in the Roman Empire. He didn't separate Italy from the Roman Empire. So Italy just became, instead of a set of provinces, it became one kingdom with Odo Vakur, the ruler, who sent taxes to Emperor Zeno and flew a Roman flag. It's weird, but it also means Italy is still in the Roman Empire. But because Odo Vakur was a German, then Hieronymus Wolf could say, the Germans took out the Roman Empire. But it's not true. It's a lie. It's a bald-faced lie. So by the time we get to the Crusades, there's a Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire is playing a major role. And the reason the Roman Empire is playing a major role is it's been in decline for a long time. When I say the Roman Empire fell in 1453, you have to remember that's after 2,200 years. The Romans aren't quite as long as the Egyptians in terms of the length of their history, right? When the Romans conquered Egypt in 31 BC, Egypt was a 4,500-year-old civilization, right? It's not quite on that scale, but it's really close. It's half that scale. And Rome had been in decline since the 200s. In other words, Rome had been on its way out for 13 centuries. So for more than half of the length of time that Rome had been around, it was struggling to survive. That's what you call tenacity, resilience. That's incredible. Who survives barely making it for that long? At one point, they actually do get conquered. And they manage to put themselves back together and reconstitute themselves and just keep going. They break up on multiple occasions. Zenobia is my favorite. There was a woman who led a rebellion in Syria, and she captured Syria, Turkey, Palestine, and Egypt, and she made her own little empire. They were too sexist to let a woman rule, so she made her six-year-old son the actual emperor. But she ruled, and his name was Wabalathus. Wabalathus. Isn't that a cool name? Anyway, and by the way, Palmyra was her capital. So sort of a strange twist, right? She was like in the middle of Syria, made her capital there. Don't worry, the Romans killed her. Something like that's not going to be allowed. And they put the empire back together, and then it fell apart. It was like an accordion. The Arabs come, tear them up. The Germans tear them up. It's a mess. The Huns tear them up. The Bulgarians tear them up. It's just wave after wave until they finally just go down once and for all in 1453. But by the time the story of the Crusades is happening, the Romans are desperately trying to hold on to what is today Turkey. I'm going to use Anatolia just because I think it makes it a little bit less confusing, at least in my brain. Anatolia was the name at the time. Turkey is the name today because it's the Turks' habit, right? They've named it after themselves. Another actor I want to introduce might sound strange. It's the Vikings. I'm going to tell you something really strange. The Vikings are one of the reasons why the Crusades happened. Isn't that weird? You're like, wait, why? Work with me here on this one because it's kind of strange. So the Vikings were Germans. They were the Germans who settled Scandinavia. Scandinavia was kind of like the worst piece of real estate in Europe at the time. Today, obviously, it's like heaven. But back then, it was the garbage piece that nobody wanted to go to. In other words, the people who became the Vikings, they never called themselves Viking. Viking is a term we've retroactively put on top of them, like the term Byzantine that Hieronymus Wolf came up with for the Roman Empire's last 1,000 years, 977 years for those of you who want it to be more precise. There's no such thing as a Byzantine Empire. The Vikings, I'm going to use the term Viking anyway, though. The Vikings got stuck with this piece of real estate where you really couldn't grow a crop. So pretty much all you could do was raise cattle and go fishing. And at some point, their population had reached a threshold.

They had sort of reached the carrying capacity of cheese rolls and dried fish. And when that happened, they had no choice but to start looking for alternatives. And they took two approaches, by the way. One approach the Vikings did was they set out to start trading. They thought, you know what? We can fix our problem if we can do trade, because we'll have the money to buy the food that we need. And the Eastern Vikings, the Swedes, got so into this, they actually started trying to figure out where they could go to. And they started reading their sagas. This is the 8th century. Not reading their sagas. They were oral histories. They were listening to their sagas. And the sagas told the Vikings that the place the Germans were from was Iran. By the way, Kermani-Iran, which is where we get the word German, because ga and ka, when languages change over time, are interchangeable. So Kerman, German. We say German because we pronounce it like a French person would. But a German says German, right? So if you're saying the study of Germanic studies, it's Germanismus, because they don't say it the way a French person would. So the sagas tell the Vikings you're originally from Persia. So the Swedes go, wow, that's an idea. Let's go. Let's see what we can find. And so what they would do is they would go to what is today Latvia. They would take their long ships up the Dvina River. They'd go as far inland as you could get, pretty close to the city of Rzhev. They would pull their ships out of the water, fully loaded, because they have to carry their supplies. They can't leave the supplies behind. So they would carry these fully loaded ships over land until they got to the Volga River. I mean, that's a pretty manly, you know what I mean? Like, they've got their armor and their weapons. And they're hauling these. I want to go backwards in time just to see this. You know there was a lot of grunting. And then they put the ship in the Volga River. And they sailed the Volga River all the way to the Caspian Sea. And they went down the Caspian Sea to the Persian coast. And they're like, hi. And the Arabs had just conquered Persia a couple of centuries earlier. And they're walking around Persia going, what is all this? You have modern agriculture and modern medicine. And you're doing philosophy. And you've invented zero. And you're doing algebra. And the Vikings are like, we don't even have a written language. We shouldn't have left. We could have had this. And they began trading. Now, to supplement their trading on that long trade route, they would also raid. And they would attack the Slavic populations along the way. And they would take some for slaves. And then they would sell them into the slave markets, make a little bit of extra koi. So maybe that. Full disclosure, I'm a quarter Swedish. So if there's a little bit too much admiration on my part, it's just ugly nationalism. The Western Vikings started raiding England. And then they started expanding where they raided. And before you knew it, they were just raiding all of northern and Western Europe. And in the process, they start to get some amazing victories. So you know, London Bridge is falling down, falling down. That's because it did. That's because my ancestors took out London Bridge. That song is based on a real event. Isn't that cool? I think it is. And so the Vikings actually end up conquering places like England. They get multiple kings of England. Cnut the Great, of course, the most famous. But there's also Svein Forkbeard. Isn't that a cool name? Svein Forkbeard. And they end up ruling this empire that stretches across Scandinavia and England. And they were doing all right for themselves. And they got their eyes on Paris. And they thought, you know what? Let's go take France. I don't know why not. We've got Latvia and Estonia and Finland and Ukraine, right? Because the Vikings, eventually the Ukrainian nobles couldn't figure out how to rule their lands. So they started hiring Viking mercenaries.

The group of Viking mercenaries they hired were the Rus, R-U-S. And the Rus eventually created Kievan Rus because they realized they were the only armed guys. And they didn't know why they were taking orders from anybody. And they just took over. And that's how Russia was founded. Isn't that crazy? Anyway, they almost got Paris. Long story short, they were on the island. They were battering down doors. They were scaling the walls. They almost got Paris. It was so close. And so after they failed to get Paris, the French came out. And they went, OK, that was too close. You almost got us. If you get a second shot, we don't think we're making it. So what do we do? We're not surrendering, surrendering. We're not giving you Paris. We're going to make you fight for it if you try to get it again. But we really don't want you to try again. We're going to meet you somewhere. And they make a deal with a guy named Rollo. And the deal is Northern France. They give Rollo Northern France. Now the Vikings, I told you, weren't called Vikings. They were called the Northmen, or depending on your language, Norsemen, or Nordmen, or Normans. And so the Vikings named Northern France after themselves. They called it Normandy. And they began ruling it. But they had a problem. And that was that the French peasants wouldn't learn German. They wouldn't learn to speak the dialects of German that the Vikings were speaking. They kept insisting on speaking French. And so the Norman nobility, Rollo, by the way, got Normandy in 911. The Norman nobility now has to learn French so that when they're abusing their peasants, the peasants understand the abuse. It doesn't help to shout at a peasant and then they don't understand you. You need them to understand. So they learn French. And what that does then is it sets us up for a really strange set of events. Somebody gets a great idea just a few decades later, 999, so 911 to 999, so 88 years later, to hire Norman mercenaries in southern Italy. And so Norman mercenaries start to travel from Northern France all the way to southern Italy. And they're being used by everybody. They're being used by the Romans, who are trying to hold on to southern Italy. They had it. They're losing it. They're trying to get it back. The Roman emperor at the time is a guy named Basil II. You want to laugh, but he was one of the greatest Roman emperors of the time period. And he went on a conquering spree and he starts carving up territory that the Romans had lost and he's putting it back in, including taking lands, Muslim lands. He actually brings the Roman Empire back to Syria and he captures Antioch and the northern end of Syria. The part of Syria that today is in Turkey is basically what he recaptured. So when the Ottoman Empire broke up, the Europeans showed up with a crayon and a napkin and they just began drawing borders. And you look at the border between Saudi Arabia and Jordan or Jordan and Iraq and you're like, why'd you do that? And they sneezed or something. Somebody got bumped and an extra wiggle line popped up. And they did that with Syria. They just chopped off the northern part and gave it to Turkey. So Basel II is re-carving the Roman Empire, but at the same time, there's all these forces pushing back and everybody's using Normans as mercenaries. That must have been awkward. You see your cousin on the other side. How much are you getting paid? And you fight for a little while. I'll pretend to kill you, OK? Don't swing at me. What eventually happens is those Normans go, why are we fighting for these other guys? And in 1030, the first Norman gets made a lord in southern Italy. And he slowly starts to conquer. And subsequent generations of Normans start to take pieces of southern Italy. And in 1061, the Normans are getting on ships and they're crossing over to Sicily. And they begin conquering Sicily. Sicily had been conquered by the Arabs two centuries earlier. The Normans also start getting hired by the Roman Empire in Anatolia, because they're being used to fight the Seljuks, who are coming west and fighting their way into Anatolia.

And so the Romans are using these Norman mercenaries in, I showed you the coin of Romanus IV. In 1071, Romanus IV has an army at a place called Manzikert. And they fight a battle against the Seljuks. And they're defeated. The Romans are defeated. The Normans take off after they were defeated. They just move out of the way. But the Romans get captured, including Romanus IV. He was taken. The Seljuks offered a ransom. The Romans are like, no, we don't ransom you. And they replaced him. The reason that mattered was the Norman commander, Russel de Baerl, decides he's going to do in Anatolia, in the middle of Turkey, by the way, Galatia. So right in the New Testament, Galatians, those are the letters that Paul writes to the Celts living in Anatolia. He decides he's going to carve out a little kingdom for himself in Galatia. And the Normans go on a conquering spree. And they make Ankara, Ankara, the capital of a Norman kingdom in the middle of Turkey. There are French-speaking Vikings ruling the middle of Turkey, which is historically populated by Celts. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. Historically populated by Celts, you know, kilt-wearing, bagpipe-playing Celts, because everything is actually intermingled and there's no boundaries. And the next thing you know, the Roman emperor is actually turning to the Seljuks and going, dude, can you help us with this guy? And the Seljuks, the ruler, the sultan, the sultanate of Rome, that's what they call themselves. Their flag was a two-headed eagle. The Roman flag was a two-headed eagle. Because when Emperor Romulus Augustus takes off his purple robes and sends it to Emperor Zeno, they've now unified the west and the east. They only have one emperor. So their new symbol for the Roman Empire is an eagle with two heads, one facing left, one facing right. Well, the Seljuks in Anatolia take that as their flag because their goal isn't to destroy the Roman Empire. It's to make a Muslim Roman Empire. Their goal is to eventually capture Constantinople one day. They don't hate the Roman Empire. They admire the Roman Empire. They want to be the Roman Empire. And so Suleiman I, the Seljuk sultanate of Rome, gets a request from the emperor, the Roman emperor, to go put down this Norman uprising. And he's baffled out of his mind. But yeah, sure, I'll help you. And in 1077, that Norman little kingdom vanishes. In 1084, the pope asks for an army to attack Spain. Spain was, at that time, majority-controlled by Muslims. The furthest north city that the Muslims owned in 1084 was a city called Barbastro. And so the pope asks for a Christian army to go to Barbastro and take it. One quarter of that army was a group of Normans. When they capture the city at first, they're pillaging it. They're slaughtering people. But the Normans decide they like the place and they stay. And the majority of the population is still Arab and it's still Muslim. And the Normans who stay start dressing like the Arabs. And they learn Arabic. And they're really digging Arab society. And they go Injun. And they go native. And it shocks everybody because it's like, wait, these French-speaking, blue-eyed, blonde Vikings are in Spain learning Muslim culture. And in a way, when you think about it, all three of these events that I just described are like little precursor crusades. In 1095, the pope holds two conventions. Both of them were in November. And Alexius Comnenus, Alexius I, the Roman Empire, comes to Italy. And this isn't a small thing because Italy isn't Roman. In fact, the pope in Rome and the Roman Empire have had a falling out that has lasted centuries. And they hate each other's guts a lot, not a little bit, a lot. So what happened was, as the Roman Empire was disintegrating, they managed to hold onto pieces of Italy, including the city of Rome. But the pope in Rome didn't like that because the original church had five patriarchs.

So the Orthodox Catholic Church. Orthodox is truth. Catholic is universal. So the Universal Truth Church, that was the original name of the Christian church. It had already had a schism. The Copts in Egypt had broken away in 284. But in the 700s, the church was still unified. But the pope in Rome came to resent the circumstances because the five patriarchs were the pope in Rome, the pope in Alexandria, the patriarch of Antioch, and the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Jerusalem. In other words, the original Christian church had five heads, two popes, two patriarchs, and an archbishop. By the way, pope came from the pope would have his child on his knee. And then people would come to kiss his ring. And they would hear the child saying, papa, papa. And it just stuck. Do you want me to say that again? The pope would have his child on his knee. You know, his kid. His kid, because the original Catholic Church didn't have a celibacy thing. They did the celibacy thing later so that they could make sure that the clergy didn't pass churches and church property down in their wills and illegitimate children in Europe couldn't inherit. So that's how that, that's why that happened. It wasn't to stop the popes from having babies. It was to stop the popes from having legitimate babies. It wasn't to stop the clergy from having families. It's just to stop the clergy from having legitimate families so they couldn't pass on church land. So anyway, in 756, the pope in Rome is sick of the fact that he's kind of second fiddle. He wants to be first fiddle. After all, it's Rome. It's Roman Empire. So he goes and he makes a deal with the Franks. And they break Rome out of the Roman Empire. It's Pope Stephen II who does this in 756. 763, Naples was still in the Roman Empire. Duke Stephen II, two different guys, same name, makes it easy to remember. 763, Naples breaks out of the Roman Empire and joins the pope in creating this papal state thing. Naples is never part of the papal states, but the idea that it's now going to be a separate thing from the Roman Empire, it breaks away. And the animosity between Rome and Constantinople just keeps growing and growing and growing until 1058. In 1058, they get into a spat that's so bitter and so nasty, they start to excommunicate each other. The patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates the pope. The pope excommunicates the patriarch. Next thing you know, they're interdicting. Interdicting is when you excommunicate whole cities, whole countries, whole regions, whole provinces. They start interdicting each other. And before they're done, Western Europe has completely interdicted Eastern Europe. And Eastern Europe has completely interdicted Western Europe. And the East took the truth, and the West took the universe. And that's why there's a Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, and a Greek Orthodox church. So when Alexios Komnenos goes to Italy in 1095, it's 37 years after they had just done this to each other. So the wounds are raw. They're fresh. And the reason Alexios Komnenos is there is he says, we're not making it. The sultanate of Rome has just taken almost all of Anatolia. We maybe have 10% of it left. We're finished to the east, which means all we have is a little piece of Southeastern Europe. We need your help. And Pope Urban II goes, you know what we should do? We shouldn't just help you a little bit. We should go all out. Let's retake the Holy Land and put it back in the Roman Empire. And Alexios Komnenos goes, yeah, why not? Let's do it. Let's make this happen. And so Pope Urban II comes out of those two talks, meeting with these top officials, including the Roman emperor, and says, I want an army to go to Jerusalem. We're going to conquer all of that and put it back in the Roman Empire. Let's go. 1096, a guy named Peter the Hermit gets up in front of everybody and says, we heard the pope loud and clear. Let's do this. And he puts together what's called the People's Crusade. It's basically just a bunch of peasants, some knights.

It's not the mercenary soldiers. It's not the knight. It's not all knights, right? It's just some peasants. They turn into a mob. And the first thing they do to sanctify the Crusades, this holy religious war, is they attack the Jews living in Germany. And the estimate is they murder about 2,000 Jews, and then they rape like 7,000 more Jews. And then they leave Germany on their way to the Holy Land to... I missed something. I feel like they read a piece of the New Testament that I... Did I? Where does it say that? Before thou goest on the crusade, holiest of holy, do what Jesus would have you do, slaughter Jews in Germany. Did I? And that is the first pogrom. That is the first documented case where Europeans, specifically post-Roman Empire, the Roman Empire hated Jews. Just like it was a hobby for them. They mostly did it in Palestine, right? It was just, ah, the Jews again. They keep throwing rocks at us. That's going to be ironic in a few centuries. So that's the first pogrom. 1096. That army works its way all the way to Constantinople. When it gets to Constantinople, Alexios Komnenos, they've been raiding the whole way because they need to feed themselves. So they're sacking villages. They're tearing into people's food stores. It's a disaster. It's a raiding mob. It shows up at Constantinople. Alexios Komnenos is like, I got to get rid of these guys as fast as I can. He goes, you know what you got to do? You got to cross the Bosporus. Here's my fleet. He puts them on a ship and he sends them across the Bosporus and they set up a camp. They actually attack a town. They capture it. And he's like, I'll send you food. You just stay on your side of the Bosporus. This is going to work out great. In the meantime, he's actually calling the Turks on the phone. Hey, there's some crazy dudes. I just deposited them on your end. Good luck with that. The guy who's now the son of Suleiman I, his name is Khalid Arslan. He decides he's got to get rid of these guys. And they want to take Nicaea. So Nicaea is pronounced Nicaea. I'm going to not say Nicaea again for the rest of the lecture. It drives me nuts. It's like Julius Caesar is Gaius Julius Caesar. Stop saying Julius Caesar. I feel like it could be a salad dressing or something. You know what I mean? It doesn't have to be the name of that guy. Nicaea was the capital for the Sultanate of Rome. So they actually put it almost across from Constantinople. And the reason is because that's their goal. It's Constantinople. They're nowhere near capturing it. They know that. But that's still, you know, it's nice to have a goal, even if it's a far off one. And so they've got Nicaea. It's like poison. And the mob, the peasant mob, the People's Crusade, as it's called, thinks it's going to capture Nicaea. And Clege Arslan basically sets up an ambush for them and slaughters them. And that's the end of the People's Crusade, for the most part. By the way, some of the leadership got away. Because, of course, that's how that usually works out. In any case, the real Crusader army doesn't show up until the next year. The real Crusader army is a mixture of nobles from across France and Germany, primarily, but also Italy, because there's Normans coming. So for our purposes, there's a bunch of Crusaders. There's too many. There's too many names. So I'm just going to simplify it a little bit. The Crusaders you need to know about are Bohemond of Toronto, not Canada, but Italy, and then his nephew, Tancred, and Godfrey de Bouillon, and Baldwin de Bologna. Baldwin and Godfrey are both from northern France. They weren't actually Normans, but they had definitely sided with the Normans. Their father, Eustace II, in fact, was with William the Conqueror in 1066 when the Normans decided to also conquer England. The Normans were very busy people. Oh, let's go to Spain. You know what? I southern it. Anatolia. England. In other words, long after the Vikings started speaking French, they're still tearing up the planet. They're on this permanent, multi-century rampage.

And it wasn't enough for them that they had captured England already twice. They wanted it a third time. They're like, this is good real estate. We want it back. And they got it. And so when Godfrey and Baldwin go on this crusade, they're not actually Normans, but they're part of the Norman sphere. So in a way, the top four of the five most important Crusaders are Normans. The fifth guy is a guy named Raimond. He's Raimond of Toulouse, also known as Raimond Saint-Gilles. He was Raimond the Fourth of Toulouse. And they show up. And Alexius, there's also Hugh de Vermandois. There's a few other guys. But I just want you to know those five. They show up at Constantinople. And they swear an oath of fealty. Well, not Tancred. He refuses. He wants nothing to do with this. And what they promise is that all the land they capture will be handed to Alexius Comnenus, the Roman emperor. And of course, they're lying through their teeth. They have no intention whatsoever of handing anything over. Their goal is to go in there, carve off land, and make their own little personal fiefdoms. They cross over the Bosporus with the Roman navy. It's 1097. Khalid Arslan isn't there to greet them. He's in southern Turkey fighting another Turk. And the reason is that Turk was trying to capture a city from an Armenian, Malatya. And Khalid Arslan was worried if Danishmen captured Malatya, it would put his position, it would weaken his position. So even though he's got this crusader threat on the west, he's so focused on his rivals that he's actually fighting them. He turns around when he realizes the crusaders have landed. He goes as fast as he can. By the time he gets there, Nicaea has already fallen. He convinces other Turks in the area to fight alongside him. They fight the crusaders at Doraleum. And they're defeated. And Khalid Arslan has to withdraw. And they just watch as the crusader army passes. The crusader army then goes through Armenia. So when the Roman Empire lost Anatolia, a piece of the Roman Empire broke away and didn't get captured by the Muslims and remained its own separate thing. It was oftentimes called Lesser Armenia. It was a little Armenian kingdom on what is today the southern coast of Turkey. And so the crusaders arrived there. Tancred was the kind of guy who would look at a situation and he would size it up real quick. He decides to basically conquer it. And he just goes and grabs all the strategic points in Lesser Armenia. And in the process, he's running into Baldwin. Baldwin has the same idea, but he's a little slower. So he keeps arriving after Tancred has done this. And the problem then is Baldwin has the bigger army. So he shows up and Tancred has a problem. Do I fight my fellow crusader, who's basically telling me he's taking my thing from me, or do I walk away? So the first time he walks away, the second time he fights. The crusaders have barely started the crusade and they're already fighting each other. Not many people die for the record. I want to say it was like two guys died and a few dozen are wounded. And then they call off the fight and they negotiate and they make a deal. But still, you can see there's already problems. They get over the mountains, the Tarsus Mountains, and they arrive at Antioch. Antioch is the first prize. So Antioch had only just been captured by the Muslims in 1084. So by the time that the crusaders have arrived, it's 1098. They set up a siege. But Baldwin decides, ah, not interested. And he takes off to the east and he goes to a city called Edessa and he puts Edessa under, he tries to capture Edessa. He doesn't put it under siege. He tries to capture Edessa. And Edessa was ruled by Armenians. And so Baldwin goes to the Armenians and he starts working out a deal with them. The leader of the Armenians in Edessa was a guy named Thoros. And Baldwin talks Thoros into adopting him and then letting him marry Thoros' daughter so that he will become now the heir to Edessa. And Thoros goes, okay. Well, Armenian culture was that when you, presumably, one of the chroniclers says this.

I'm not sure it's actually true. That's one of the problems you always have when you're reading historical accounts. You're always like, mm, did that really happen? According to the chronicler, Armenian culture was when you got adopted, your adoptive father and mother wore a really big gown and then you would take off your top, you'd have pants on, and then you would crawl under the gown, but they're completely naked under, and you hug them. Anyway, so apparently that's what Baldwin did with Thoros and his wife. And then he waited around for a while until a mob grabbed Thoros and his wife and hanged them. And that's the birth of the first crusader state. We now have the county of Edessa. Baldwin is the first crusader lord to rule a chunk of territory. I think it was May 1098. In the meantime, the siege in Antioch is still going on. Bohemond is the guy who wants Antioch for himself, but so does Raimond. So there's now two crusaders both pushing for it, but the problem is they still gotta capture it first. They haven't captured it. The guy who was the ruler of Antioch was a guy named Yarhisian. And Yarhisian starts putting out feelers to see if he can get help to break this, the crusader siege. And there's two guys nearby. There's the guy who's running Damascus, because even though they're part of the Seljuk Empire, the Seljuk Empire is already coming apart at the seams. The Seljuk warlords don't like each other. They don't cooperate. They see each other as rivals. They're constantly backstabbing each other. And the guy in charge of Damascus is a guy named Dukak. And Dukak's brother, Ridwan, is the guy in charge of Aleppo. They hate each other's guts. They see each other as rivals. So Yarhisian sends for help from Dukak. Dukak takes an army, and he has to go past Aleppo, right? And he's coming up past Aleppo. He gets to line of sight of the crusader army. He panics. He turns around, and he heads back to Damascus. So Yarhisian is like, oh, what do I do? I guess I have to talk to Ridwan. But he doesn't want anything to do with Ridwan, because Ridwan has a group of allies that he didn't like. The Hashishans. The Hashishans were Shia who decided they didn't like the direction Islam was going in. Sunnis were systematically winning. The Seljuks were Sunnis. And the Seljuks had replaced the Buyids, who were Shia, and had been defeating the Fatimids, not replace them. The Fatimids were also Shia. And so there is this guy, Hassan al-Sabah, who decides he wants to take a different approach to fight for the Shia cause. And that different approach is he's going to get into political intrigue, spying, and assassinating people. And Hashishan is where we get the word assassin from. Now, whether or not they used Hashish, we don't really know. That could have been the chroniclers trying to make a story up. In any case, Hassan al-Sabah's followers were total fanatics. And Ridwan, the ruler of Aleppo, was totally into them. And they were friends. And they were working together. And so this scares Hashishan. So he doesn't really want anything to do with this. He asks Ridwan to send an army. And Ridwan does pretty much the same thing Dukak does. And nothing comes of it. So Hashishan realizes he's running out of food. He's running out of time. But so are the crusaders. The crusaders are literally starving to death. They've been traveling for months. It's a year now. And they're running out of supplies. And they've been slaughtering their horses along the way. For food purposes, they're down to like 800 horses. And probably half the crusader army is already gone by this point. Some of them died. Some of them got sick. Some of them broke a leg. Some of them just were like, you know what? I don't need this. And they turned around and they headed home. So now, you can see on the inside, Antioch is desperate because he's trying to figure out how he's going to get through this. And the crusaders like Bohemond and Rahamund are trying to figure out how they're going to get in the walls.

And at that point, another guy jumps into the story. And the other guy is the ruler of Mosul, Karbuka. Karbuka, this Yahishan convinces Karbuka to come with an army. But Karbuka has to pass Edessa on the way. And he's looking at Edessa. And he goes, this Baldwin has it. I want it. And so he stops his army. For three weeks, he parks it outside of Edessa. And then he decides he can't take it. And so he abandons the siege. And he heads to Antioch. But by the time he gets to Antioch, his generals are working against him. And so there's all this intrigue going on before he even gets to Antioch. But even though he's still heading to Antioch, it's kind of too late. Because in the meantime, because he took so long, because he added those three weeks, there was a guy named Firuz. Firuz was accused of dealing on the black market even though he knew and was a friend of Yahishan. And so he gets charged a heavy fine. He's so furious about this that he decides to betray his own people. Firuz tells the crusaders, I'm going to let you in to the city. The crusaders are like, why would we believe you? This is probably a trap. He goes, I'm going to give you my son. If it's a trap, kill my son. Crusaders are like, really? OK. Why are you doing this? He goes, I want land, gold, and vengeance. They go, OK. We can give you all three of those. And so in the night, he had access to a window that looked out over the walls. And he just dropped a really long rope down. And the crusaders came up the rope one at a time till there were about 500 guys inside the city. And they began fighting for the gate. Yahishan hears the sound. He panics. He jumps on a horse. And he rides off. He leaves his son and wife and family behind. He just takes off. He doesn't even assess the situation. He just figures, it's over. I'm out of here. He rides for days. He finally collapses from riding. His entourage try to put him back on the horse. They can't get him back on the horse. He's having a depression bout or something. He just lays on the side of the road. A peasant walks by, recognizes who he is, and cuts his head off and takes it to the crusaders and gets a reward. In the meantime, Yahishan's son, Shams al-Daula, son of the state, sun as in the thing in the sky, not child. Shams al-Daula, isn't that a cool name? Who would name their kid that? Anyway, Shams is beautiful, but of the state? Anyway, he's got the citadel, and he's holding on to it. He's like, OK, they've got the city. But he's also watching what the crusaders are doing in the city. They're not kind conquerors. They're not walking through and going, oh, hi, everybody. How's it going? They are murdering everybody. They're just going through the streets, slaughtering the inhabitants of Antioch. They're killing the men. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the poor. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the women. They're killing the babies. They're leaving nobody. And Shams is up there in the citadel going, what? Who are these people? Why are they doing this? Why wouldn't you want the city intact, somebody to tax, somebody to work for you? Why are you slaughtering the city? And there's nothing you can do about it except resist and hold on to the citadel. That's when Karbuka's army shows up. Too late. Shams actually sneaks out of the city to go meet with him to try and coordinate what's going to happen next. How are they going to fight for the city? Because he hasn't given up. Karbuka fires him on the spot. He goes, you're done. You're not going back to the citadel. He then sets up his army to fight. But the princes who are with him fear, Dukak and Ridwan, that if he succeeds, he will then be able to establish authority over Aleppo and Damascus. And so they actually pull off the field and start heading home. And when the rest of his army sees this, they lose heart. The crusaders see what's happening. They see them pulling away. So they come running out of the gate because the crusaders had just found the lance that speared Jesus.

The Romans check to see if he's dead by spearing him. Because if fluid comes out, it means he's drowned in his own fluids. Because that's the goal of crucifixion, is to drown you slowly. And they found the lance that did this. It's not probably, right? Probably what happened was a monk took a lance and buried it and said, I'm pretty sure it's somewhere around here. You guys should dig for it. They dig. They find it. They're like, it's a miracle. And they come charging out of the city towards Kabuka's army. His army's morale has collapsed. His morale has collapsed. They just turn and run away. And the crusaders don't pursue them because they think it must be a trap because they can't figure out why the larger army just ran away for no reason. And then they have their city. There's a brief struggle between Raimond and Bohemond. Bohemond wins. And Bohemond gets to keep Antioch. And then the rest of the crusaders go, we're not here for Antioch. We're here for Jerusalem. Let's keep going. Bohemond goes, I'm good. I got what I wanted. I just wanted one of the richest cities on the planet. Although it's not rich anymore because you just killed its inhabitants. Anyway, I don't understand. They start marching to Jerusalem. The next city they come upon is a town called Ma'ara. When they arrive at Ma'ara, the population fights as hard as they can. So it's soldiers and citizens holding onto the city as hard as they can. But eventually the crusaders get in and they capture the city. When they do, the crusaders murder all 20,000 inhabitants and eat them. So there's multiple sources that say this on both sides. It's always good to have both sides saying it. I know of three sources that are from the crusader side that say they ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. And they describe it in slightly different ways, but it's mostly the same. One of them says that they spit at the adults and the children and just roasted them over a fire. Another one says that they would cut chunks of flesh off of them and then roast the individual pieces over a fire. But it's pretty widespread agreement that the crusaders ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. But there's a lesson in this story that applies to today. So one of the things people will do who want to defend an indefensible position is they'll find something to nitpick. So one of the crusaders says that the people were tortured first, one of the crusader chronicles. But none of the Muslim chronicles say that the people were tortured first. And so what I've seen happen, even on BBC, is somebody will say, well, they may have eaten the people, but they didn't torture them. So first of all, I think if you slaughter 20,000 people, including the children in front of the parents, that's torture. But then second, I kind of don't care if that crusader's chronicles said there was torture and there wasn't or not, because I still think there was a horrible crime committed here. Why are you focusing on that one thing? So no Muslims are saying there was torture. Only one crusader was saying there was torture. Nobody's having an argument with you, dude. There's no, sure, there's no torture. They just killed them and ate them. The reason I'm bringing this up is you see this kind of nitpicking. Like, for example, with the Holocaust, Holocaust deniers, I have seen, focus on the number. So for the record, it wasn't 6 million Jews. It was probably 5.1 to 5.4. 6 million is a slight exaggeration. It's not a big exaggeration, but it's a slight exaggeration. So the Holocaust deniers would focus on the number. Well, it wasn't 6 million. If you just take the 5.1, you took away their ability to do this. And now you can, well, how about the 5.1? And then there's nowhere they can go, because that's the number. The 5.4 is also a number, possibly. But just go with the low. 5.1 is already a horrific, nightmarish, hellish, evil. It doesn't have to be 6. You see what I'm saying? It doesn't have to have been torture. We're good with it just being cannibalism.

So be careful when you're arguing, when you're dealing with people. What is that called? I feel like it's distraction. It's not gaslighting. It's a little different thing. It's like, yeah, but what about? Anyway, the Crusaders then approached Tarabulus, Tripoli. It was one of the wealthiest cities on the planet at the time. So was Antioch, by the way, but not anymore. Tarabulus had a library in it with 100,000 books. It was ruled by a qadi, as opposed to a guy who took the title of maybe king or something. It was ruled by a guy who had the title, basically, judge, which is kind of cool. And the city was rich. It had these big walls around it. The Crusaders set up a siege. There was no point. There was no way they were getting in. So they bypass it. And then they decide, you know what? Let's just keep bypassing. We have Antioch. We have Edessa. We have Ma'ara. Let's just go straight to Jerusalem. Why are we capturing anything else? So they bypass Beirut. They bypass Arsuf, Acre. They just don't deal with any of it. Sur, Fayda, they go straight to Jerusalem. When they get there, they immediately attack it. They don't have any ladders. They don't have any siege equipment. This city has a wall on it. It has a citadel. So the Crusaders just go like a mob, charging up to the thing. And they're like banging on. And the defenders are pouring oil on them, shooting them with arrows, going, they can't get in here. Why are they doing this? And hundreds of them are wounded and killed for no effect. So then the Crusaders set up a siege. The problem is that Jerusalem is brilliantly designed to not be siegeable. So all the sprigs are inside the wall. So the area around it is arid. So the army stuck trying to besiege this thing basically has to run a water line to the Jordan River and by bucket bring the water to the army. That's a tough thing to do. But that's what they're going to do. And they're praying. They're hoping that God will intercede and give them a break. And it may not have been God, but it was the Genovese. The Genovese show up with some English volunteers by ship. And the Genovese brought the material needed to build siege equipment. They build the siege equipment, and they attack the city. So a little bit of, I'm going to bring in another actor, another player. So Egypt had been taken over by the Fatimids. The Fatimids were Shia who had started in North Africa. They took over Egypt. By the way, they found Cairo, 969. Cairo is just barely over 1,000 years old. It's such a baby for the Middle East, right? Middle Easters go, oh, you're 1,000? Oh, you're so young. You're so young. Your whole life is ahead of you. Of course, Cairo is a mega massive city. It's the sixth largest metropolitan area on the planet. There's only three metropolitan areas on the planet that aren't in Asia that are in the top 10. Cairo, Sao Paulo in Brazil, and Mexico City are the three that aren't in Asia. Everything else is Shanghai and Tokyo and Calcutta. You know what I mean? So the Fatimids are doing all right, but something really weird is happening. The Fatimids hated the Seljuks, but the Fatimids liked the Romans. They were allies. So when this whole crusade thing happened, in the mind of the Fatimids, who had just lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks a few years earlier, what's going to happen is the crusaders, who are technically in the service of the Roman Empire, are going to split that land. Syria will go to the Romans. Palestine will go to Egypt. That's what they're thinking is going to happen. So they decide, let's go grab Jerusalem from the Seljuks before the crusaders arrive to do our part in this alliance. They have an explicit alliance with Rome. This isn't like they're speculating. This is the deal that they've made with Alexios Komnenos. And so they send an army. They defeat the Seljuks. They capture Jerusalem. And then they send an envoy to meet with the crusaders. And the crusaders just keep coming. And the Egyptians are like, what are you doing?

No, no, you stay on that side. That's the deal. We're going to split this. And the crusaders just keep coming. And it becomes clear to the Fatimids, they're going to fight. They're allies. So they dig in. And that's when the siege equipment comes and the crusaders break in. And the Egyptian general in command of the defense of Jerusalem, Iftikhar, is looking at this going, how do I fight this now that the crusaders have a sectional wall? And so he retreats his men to the citadel. Once they're in the citadel, there's nothing he can do for the population of Jerusalem. All he can do is he can hold on. It's basically a thorn in their side. He's going to make it so that the crusaders can't control Jerusalem, but they can control parts of Jerusalem. And he won't control any of the merchant part of Jerusalem, the commerce part of Jerusalem. He'll just have a military piece. And eventually, he'll run out of supplies. And their goal is to fight to the death. There's no point. They saw what happened at Ma'ara, and they saw what happened at Antioch. They know who the crusaders are. They're supposed to be allies. They're being backstabbed. They get it. But the crusaders really want the city. And so they start negotiating. And the deal that they come up with, Raymond Saint-Gilles comes up with, is the following, that the Egyptians will leave in groups of five. They'll leave the citadel, and then they'll exit the city five at a time. That way, if the crusaders break their word, turn on them, they'll only kill those five dudes who are in the middle of leaving. And then the guys that are still in the citadel, they can just keep fighting. And anybody who escaped has already escaped. And that's the deal. So the first five go, and then another five, and another five. And you know the last five were like, oh, god, you know they're going to turn on us. But they don't. And the last five get away. And then the crusaders go over to the gate, and they close it. They go over to the Muslim quarter, and they just begin murdering everybody. They're just walking through the city, slaughtering person after person. Tancred, the guy that I talked about, with the strategic mind who kept running into trouble with Baldwin until Baldwin took Edessa, he can't take it. He's like, what are we doing? He runs over to a group of Muslims who were running. And he's like, whoa, whoa, I'm not going to kill you. He hands them his banner. And he says, if crusaders approach you, say you're with Tancred. And show them my banner, and they won't harm you. And they're, of course, grateful. And then he just sort of runs around the city trying to figure out what to loot and how to save people's lives. He hasn't given up the looting. Don't be naive about this. But he's also like, let's not just murder everybody. And he describes in his own memoir, later on coming upon that group of Muslims laying there dead on his bloody banner. The crusaders didn't even care. They're just like, you're with Tancred? A group of Muslims realize there's no surviving this. This is over. So they decide, let's go to the mosque. Let's die praying. And so they barricade themselves inside the mosques. The crusaders eventually smash the doors open. They slaughter everybody inside. They get buckets of water. They wash the blood out. They go to the top of the minaret. They break the crescent moon off, and they stick a cross on top. They say a prayer. Boom. Insta-church. Then they go to the Jewish quarter. Because see, Jerusalem was in four quarters. A Muslim quarter, two Christian quarters, and a Jewish quarter. Why are the crusaders here? So that Christians can own Jerusalem. Because clearly they could be there if they had half the city. Not interesting. So they go to the Jewish quarter. And the Jews know what's coming. It's not rocket science here. So they just start running to synagogues. They figure, you know, let's do like those Muslims did. We'll die in prayer. The crusaders believed that Jews were so horrible, so evil, you couldn't wash out the synagogue afterwards and turn it into a church.

So they just piled wood around the synagogues and burned them to the ground, burning the Jews inside alive. And then they go to the two Christian quarters. And of course, at this point, the Christian population is peeing itself. Because it's just watched half the city get exterminated. And they go, you have the true cross, where is it? And the Christians go, we're not telling you. You're savages. And the crusaders go, OK, we got you. And they start murdering the Christian clergy. They're like, who's a priest? Let's have your priest. And they just start slaughtering the priests. They're like, when we're done, we're going to do the deacons. And then we're going to start working on your families. Eventually, somebody tells them, here's the true cross. Please stop killing us. And they stop massacring the Christians as well. But then they turn to the Christians and go, remember that great schism in 1058? These Catholic priests are your new priests. Get used to it. We're not doing that anymore. Your orthodox ways are out. And they're like, yeah, whatever. And that's how the crusaders captured Jerusalem. Isn't that a heartwarming story? Is that too much sarcasm? At that point, the Egyptians are trying to figure out what to do. They send an army to Ascalon with the hope that they'll eventually be able to come back and fight to capture Jerusalem back. Godfrey is named the new ruler of Jerusalem. He does not take the title king. So he's just the ruler. We'll get to that later. He takes his army. He runs to Ascalon. And the Egyptians were in disarray. They weren't expecting this. And so they weren't set up properly. And he attacks them within their disarray. And a bunch of them fall back. They drop into the fortress. The rest of them escape. And the crusaders get another win. They don't capture Ascalon. But they definitely humiliate the Egyptian army and buy themselves some time. The Egyptians aren't done. Their leader is a guy named Al-Aftal Shahanshah. Now, Shahanshah is not Arabic. It's Persian. But Al-Aftal is. The best leader of leaders is his name. Dude, if you have that as your name, you need to get into politics. That's incredible. That's incredible. Anyway, so Al-Aftal is actually a slave. Isn't that weird? And he's actually Armenian. So the guy running the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt, it has a caliph, a khalifa. It has a Shia khalifa. The guy running it is actually an Armenian slave. There's an actual khalifa who's a Shia Arab. But the guy running it, the wazir, is an Armenian slave named the best leader of leaders. And he's like, we're not doing this. He sends an army. They attack Ramla. Godfrey is dead. Godfrey dies. We don't know why. There's one person says that he was killed in battle. Another person said he got sick. Another person said he was poisoned. Godfrey's dead. He was literally the ruler of Jerusalem for a year. He's replaced by Baldwin, the guy that captured Edessa. He comes down. It's his brother. So the chronicler said that when Baldwin received the news, he was very happy, but also a little sad that his brother had died. And he comes down, and he's crowned king. And that's the moment in the year 1100 that the kingdom of Jerusalem is officially going, because there's now a king. But Godfrey was at 1099 when they captured Jerusalem. He meets Al-Afdal at Ramla in 1101. And he defeats the Egyptian army. The Egyptian army withdraws. They come back the next year, because Al-Afdal is not going to give up easily. They attack Ramla. And this time, they beat the crusaders. The crusaders fall to Jaffa. And in the second battle at Jaffa, the crusaders win again. The Egyptians withdraw. They come back in 1105 to do it again. They attack Ramla. And they're defeated a third time. And the Egyptians give it a rest. They're like, OK, we're exhausted losing. In the meantime, something really critical happens for the purposes of how the crusades are going to unfold. And it's the Battle of Haran. So Haran used to be called Karhaye.

Karhaye is where the Romans fought the Persians for the first time in 53 BC. And the Romans were, I mean, just summarily defeated. It was a catastrophe. 26,000 Romans against 8,000 Persians. And the Persians maybe lost like 100, 150. And the Romans lost like 13,000 dead, 10,000 captured. So the crusaders are going to do another Karhaye, only the city's been renamed Haran. And the Muslim army comes out to meet it at Haran. It's southeast of Edessa. And the crusaders are defeated. They are beaten in the field. And in fact, one of the crusaders is captured. His name is Baldwin. But it's a different Baldwin. It's not the king of Jerusalem. It's his cousin. I think it's his cousin. And his cousin's name was Baldwin Borsk. That's what's in my, Borsk, I think is what it was. And he's become the count of Edessa when Baldwin becomes the king of Jerusalem. And so he goes into captivity. And he's stuck in captivity for four years. And while he's in captivity, Bohemond himself also gets captured. And he ends up in captivity. So there's two crusaders that are now out of the picture because they've been captured. And then Raimon decides he wants Terabolus. So Raimon was probably supposed to become the king. But for whatever reason, he decided he didn't want to be the king of Jerusalem. He wanted to be the king of Terabolus. So what he did was he set up a siege for Terabolus after they captured Jerusalem in 1102. And he's built a fortress north of Terabolus. And he's fighting day after day. The defenders of Tripoli come out late in 1104. They set his fortress on fire. Raimon himself is severely injured in the fire. He survives it but dies like three or four months later from his wounds. So the crusaders have now lost basically three, four of their top crusaders. Godfrey is dead. Raimon is dead. Bohemond is in captivity. Baldwin, spoiler alert, who will become Baldwin II, who will become the second king of Jerusalem, is in captivity. So that's a weird story, obviously. And so they're in trouble. By this point, most of the crusaders have actually gone home. In other words, if the Muslims had just attacked in an organized fashion at that moment, there was nothing to stop them from just taking it all back. But the Muslims are in such disarray. And each of these Turkish warlords, these Seljuk warlords, hates each other's guts so much they just won't cooperate together. It gets so weird that at some point, 1108, there's going to be a battle. Baldwin gets released. And Baldwin is going to make a deal with the ruler of Mosul. And he's going to field an army. So it's going to be a crusader army next to a Seljuk army. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight against each other. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight Tancred. Tancred ended up becoming the regent of Edessa while Baldwin was in prison. Tancred doesn't want to give it up. He doesn't want Baldwin to come back. Tancred goes and he gets Ridwan, the guy from Aleppo. So there's a Tancred. The crusader has a Muslim ally. And they're next to each other in the field. And they're going to fight a battle against a Muslim crusader army. And by the way, they defeat Jawali and Baldwin. They have to escape. And Tancred basically keeps Edessa as a result. He's eventually talked into participating in the siege of Tarabulus. They're going to actually try and take it once and for all. And when he does that, he reconciles with Baldwin. But here we are. It's 1108. The crusaders just captured Jerusalem nine years earlier. And there's a battle where there's Muslims and crusaders on both sides fighting each other. Like, it's already gone sideways in every way you can imagine. And that's the first part of the Crusades. Having said that, there's so much more to this story, which is what I warned you from the beginning. Like, I am not going to get through the Crusades. I literally got you to 1108. By the way, my goal was 1125. But I think I'm basically out of time. So I'm surrendering and accepting I'm not going to get to my goal.

But to put things in perspective, the second crusade is 1145. The kingdom of Jerusalem is going to go down in a ball of flames. In case you didn't know that, I hope I didn't spoil this for you. But in 1187, after the Battle of Hattin. So then the third crusade is after that. And then there's a fourth crusade in 1202. And so in other words, the Crusades are just going to keep going for a while. And they actually don't end by most people's. The usual number we use is 1291. So it's 195 years. I've just covered nine of it. Well, 12 if you include the, well, even more. 13 if you include the peasant crusade. By the way, there's supposedly a children crusade in this. It's a lot of fun. The Crusades were great. I'm going to tell you the children crusade. I'm going to let you go. It happens later. So this is out of time sequence. But it's just too fun since I mentioned it. A group of children think if they go and just show up in Jerusalem, the Muslims will give it back. Because this is after the Battle of Hattin. So they don't, children obviously walking from France to Palestine is a little tricky. So what they do is they walk to Venice. And they show up. And they ask, will you, the Venetian Navy, just take us? And the Venetians go, yeah, of course. It would be our sacred duty to take you. And the children are never heard from again. They were sold into slavery. The Venetians just put them on the ships, took them to slave markets, and just. Isn't that just capitalism? I'm pretty sure that's just capitalism. All right. Thank you for your time. And if you want to come see my show and tell, I'll stick around to let you do that. And actually, you know what? I'll field a question. And then I'll let you go. How about that? I always forget to do that. I actually don't always. No? No questions? OK, good. We're done.

I have some stuff I want to do before I jump in, and I also want to talk about what I'm going to do when I jump in so that it's not a complete surprise. So one of the things I want to do, I have a lot of trouble with, which is it's self-promotion. So I'm going to pass these around, these are just bookmarks. It's advertising my novel, and I brought a copy of my novel. So I have a novel, and it's The Blood Throne of Caria, and the reason I'm pushing it, and it makes me feel dirty doing this, so I'm probably just off a little bit, is because I'm ramping up to try and put out another novel, and if I can get a little bump in sales before that happens, it helps me. So if you like that kind of stuff, get my novel. That kind of stuff is historical fiction. I'm particularly obsessed with basically everything from Iran to Italy. That's like my zone where I obsess about. This is set in the 6th century, 5th century, 5th century B.C. in the southwest corner of Turkey. And it's about a real person, so it's historical fiction, but she doesn't have, her name is Artemisia, she doesn't have a lot of, how should we say this, there's a lot of attacks done on her by historians, and so my goal in writing this novel was to figure out what was true and what was a lie, and then correct the lie. But I can't claim it's the truth because it's speculation on my part, so hence historical fiction. Somebody's going to ask at some point what they should read. This is a fun way to start, it's The Crusades Through Arab Eyes, wouldn't that be a novel idea, by Amin Malouf. It's an old book, it's 1985 if I remember correctly, but there, now I've done that part. I also want to dedicate this talk to a group of people, so it's a small list, but I just want to do this. Omar, Saeed, Iman, Iman, Iman, and then Hadi, I'm probably forgetting somebody else I intended. You know what, I'm going to throw Jayden into the mix, he'll be like, oh my god, I can't believe you threw my name in there. I actually have a, I was just gifted a piece of rock from Palestine from the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and so I'm probably going to hold on to it the entire talk because, well, my talk is going to take place in Palestine mostly, so this is kind of a strange thing to have right now. Also, let's see, what did I do with it, I probably already lost it. I brought show and tell, but it won't work because the camera is too small and you're sitting too far away. I actually brought coins from the time period, so I will, after the talk, you can come up and look at it, and then what I'll do is we'll put, for the people who are watching this on video, I'll just put pictures up on it, but just to give you an idea of what I have, this is a coin from William II. It's after the period I'm talking about today because I'm not going to get to him. William II was the king of Sicily. The year in my head is 1153, but who knows. Anyway, the reason I brought it was because I am going to talk about the Normans, and I'm going to talk about Sicily a little bit for background purposes, and I kind of wanted to stick this in your head a little bit. On one side, the coin is written in Latin. On the other side, it's written in Arabic because the Normans took Sicily from the Arabs, and so they just made it so that they were a bilingual society. This, let me see, hold on, I'll do this one here. This coin is going to matter because this is Romanus IV, the Roman emperor. I'm going to talk about him in a little bit of detail, just briefly, because he's going to set things in motion that make the rest of the story possible, and then when you look at the coin, you'll see that the quality of the coin dramatically falls when you get to Alexios Komnenos. Alexios Komnenos becomes the Roman emperor just like 11 years later, and the quality of the coin is terrible compared to this one, so it makes you realize how far into decline the Romans had fallen. One of the things I'm going to do is I'm going to do a little bit of background, and in the process of doing the background talk, I'm going to bring up the birth of the Arab Empire.

We don't know what year this coin was minted because it doesn't have a year on it. It's actually a counterfeit coin. The Arabs, when they made their empire, needed coins, and they went and stole a Roman mint, and they began minting coins, Roman coins, so it has Latin letters on the back. It has three Roman emperors, well, an emperor and his two sons on the front. They're holding in one hand a cross, and in the other hand a globus cruciger with a cross sticking out of it, so there's literally six crosses on this coin, and this is the Arab Empire, one of the Arab Empire's first ever coins. It was minted during the Rashadin period. We don't know a date, so I can't tell you who, but most likely it would have been Uthman ibn Affan or the Khalifa Ali ibn Abi Talib. It's probably not one of the earlier two, and then this coin is Muawiyah I. He did the same thing. It's a Roman emperor with two crosses in his hand, and on the back, Latin letters, and one of the reasons why I wanted to sink that into your heads is to also show how the boundary between things is really blurry, right? We're a society of people who want to put everything into categories, including ourselves. We can't wait to label ourselves, and we keep breaking it down further and further, and the reality is these categories are all imaginary and made up. Nobody is that easy to categorize, you know what I mean, let alone whole societies, especially societies where everything is blurred together. I probably have said Arabic words, for example, that are English in this. I wasn't paying attention, but you know, at one point I might say the word nadir or zenith or zero, and then by contrast, Arabic is filled with Latin words. For example, the word faloos, the word for money, comes from pholos. It literally was, one of those coins was a pholos that I was holding up, and so the word is actually Latin. It's not Arabic. It's just the Arabs used the Latin word. Cres, the word for cherries, comes from crassinus, which is the Latin word for cherry, and it can go on and on because everything is stuck together. All right, so as Eric Deggans would say, I'm going to do a bunch of table setting. Eric Deggans is a TV critic that I listen to on NPR, and he recently complained about too much table setting, but I don't know how to not do table setting, and the reason I have to do the table setting is if I just jump into the Crusades and start talking about it, it'll be entertaining because there's a lot of violence. Like, if you enjoy People Massacred, and I know you do because I watch the same movies you do, then this is a great story because it is gory, but it's kind of helpful to know why it happened, and how did we even get into the situation where it was possible. So I can't skip that. Having said that, I have no intention and no belief that I can, even if I wanted to, cover the entire Crusades. So in other words, this is part one. You're just setting this up now. I will try to do the entire Crusades, but I'm betting I'm going to have to do four parts. One of the reasons I don't know is, some of you have figured this out about me, I don't write my lectures out, so I actually don't know what I'm going to say until it starts happening, and so as a result, I don't know how the timing of this is going to land, so it'll be fun. I'm exploring this with you, and we'll see where it goes. It'll probably be a train wreck, and people will hate it, but it'll be fun for me anyway, and that's the important thing. All right, so, to do this, I need to introduce some actors. The first actor I want to introduce is probably the most important actor in the story, and it's the Arabs. And the reason they're the most important, obviously, is because the Crusaders are going to invade the Arab world to fulfill their goal of making a kingdom of Jerusalem. So, the Arabs created an empire that most people don't refer to, don't talk about, that's basically been deleted from history. It's the Arab empire, although I've frequently heard it referred to as the Muslim empire.

The reason you need to not do that and call it the Arab empire is the Arab empire was created by Arabs, like the Roman empire was created by Romans. We don't call it the pagan empire, and when it becomes Christian, we don't call it the Christian empire, right? When it becomes Japanese, we don't call them the Shinto Buddhist empire, you know what I mean? When Alexander the Great made his empire, we don't call it the pagan empire. So, why would we do this in this one particular case? And what I'm going to pose to you is the reason we usually don't even name it, and if we do, we sometimes call it the Muslim empire, is because of anti-Arab hate. We have that running through the core of our society, the core of our civilization, and one of the reasons is because of the events that led to the Crusades and the Crusades themselves. In other words, by doing anti-Arab hate, you're perpetuating this old wound. It's time to let it go. Although, by the time we're done tonight, you'll be like, oh my gosh, what's that about? So, it'll be good. The Arabs began making their empire, and by empire, I mean it in the true sense of the word empire. To be clear, a state that rules multiple countries and nations. That's all you need to be to be an empire. Having said that, you could claim that in the United Kingdom today, what's left of the great empire is still an empire, because Great Britain is Wales, England, and Scotland. That's three countries. And then, throw in Northern Ireland, Gibraltar, Bermuda, and the Falkland Islands and Malvinas, and you end up with multiple countries, right? Or at least pieces of multiple countries. So, they began making their empire in 633, when the first Khalifa, Abu Bakr, launches his armies into the Persian and Roman Empires simultaneously, in what should have been a completely insane, impossible, can't-be-done event. And it's not only done, but by 711, the Arab Empire became the largest empire on the planet to that date. There have been larger empires since, but there had never been a larger empire before this. It stretched, by 711, from Spain to Pakistan. It went all the way into Central Asia. So, if you can conjure a map of the Roman Empire, it owned about 60% of the Roman Empire. Conjure a map of the Persian Empire, it owned 100% of the Persian Empire. And it went into Central Asia, and it went into India. Fine? For those of you, because I just said Pakistan, for those of you who don't know, the British cruelly and sadistically cut Pakistan out of India. Pakistan is India. It's just, you know how the Brits are. It's divide and conquer, wreck, destroy, ruin. India is named after the Indus River, which is 100% in Pakistan. It's just cruel. You know what I mean? Anyway, so, this Arab Empire, by the way, when it was born, it had a tiny Muslim population. But by 711, it had a few more Muslims. It was maybe 5-10% of the population was Muslim. The empire itself was majority Christian, 60% Christian. In fact, probably somewhere around 60% of the world's entire Christian population was in the Arab Empire. Isn't that hard to comprehend? The majority of the world's Christians lived in the Arab Empire, an empire that was majority Christian. In 711. So, the empire has been around that, right? From 633 to 711, it's already been around for a few decades. It's not like it was just born. One of the reasons why Muslims are such a small percentage of the population is they didn't convert by the sword. There was no compulsion to become Muslim. At first, what the Muslim conquerors did was they said, if you're Christian or Jewish, you worship the book. Therefore, you have a pathway to heaven. So, you have to be treated like a full human. But then, as they kept conquering, they kept running into other religions. And they just kept extending it. So, the Zoroastrians, okay, yeah, why not? And, right, centuries later, by the time they're in India proper, they're like, yeah, Hindus too, it's all good. We're going to make this work. Right?

That was what kept happening. By the way, the Arab Empire in 711 was probably about five, ten percent Buddhist, just to mess with you. Afghanistan had a giant Buddhist population. So, it seems counterintuitive, but there it is. That empire gets into a conversation with itself. And the conversation it has with itself stems from a problem that they had. The Arabs had never ruled themselves, let alone ruled an empire, right? Until this moment. 633, the year they launched the empire, is the year the Arabs, for the first time in history, ruled the entire Arabian Peninsula. So, they don't even catch their breath. They conquer the Arabian Peninsula, put it under a single state, and then they just go, they just keep going. Next thing you know, they've conquered the Persian Empire, and they've conquered the majority of the Roman Empire, and they're in France, trying to conquer France. What was the Battle of Tours? 732 is in my head, I hope that's not wrong. So, this empire has a problem. Arabs don't know how to run an empire. They've never run an empire before. Normally, conquerors are arrogant, and they're cruel, and they're sadistic. Like, take the Romans. So, I'm part Italian. So, for those of you that like being mean to Italians, a little bit, but it's okay. Gaius Julius Caesar, the guy you incorrectly called Julius Caesar, when he conquered Gaul, there were three million people living in Gaul. When he left, there was one million people living in Gaul. He murdered one million, he enslaved one million, and then he looked at the remaining million and went, welcome to the Republic. By the way, we'd like for you to worship our gods. Let's have your taxes now. Oh, and we're going to steal your technology. That's what conquerors often did, right? The Arabs, on the other hand, were humble about this, and they told the Romans and the Persians they had conquered, we don't know what we're doing, we don't know how to do this. We want to just leave you where you are. You're a bureaucrat, you're running this province, don't stop, and then we'll watch you. Maybe we'll figure it out, but in a few generations, hopefully we'll have this sorted out. In the meantime, I'm going to counterfeit this money over here. It's got crosses on it, but that's okay. I'm okay with that. I like Jesus. And that was kind of their conversation. So, the reason that matters is Muawiyah, I showed you the coin. Muawiyah I moves the capital after a civil war that lasts five years, that ends in 661. He moves the capital to Damascus from Medina. When he puts the capital in Damascus, he puts it in a former Roman city. And that matters, because it meant that the bureaucrats around Muawiyah are shaping the policies he's creating, and it orients the Arabs in the Arab empire west. It orients them towards the Romans. And in fact, he's going to lay siege to Constantinople. He won't capture it. But then a subsequent Arab the next century is going to do it again, and they'll fail a second time. Had they captured Constantinople on either of those two, they would have taken out the Romans too, because they had already conquered the Persians. Yazdegerd III was the last Persian emperor. He's gone. Persians are done. But the Romans are still hanging on. For the record, what saved the Romans was the emperor put out a contest. He said, anybody who can invent something that can save us, I will give you a sum of money. A Syrian refugee, isn't that cool? Isn't that weird, a refugee? I thought we were supposed to put them in cages. Anyway, a Syrian refugee invented a flamethrower. So what happened was the Roman Navy had a chain blocking the vulnerable north end of Constantinople. They had a chain that went across, so the Arab Navy couldn't get through it. And the Roman Navy was hiding behind the chain, this big chain. And the Romans pulled up the chain, and the Roman Navy started coming out. The Arabs are like, why are they coming? We'll just sink them. This is suicide. And the Romans came right up on them.

And the Arabs had no idea they had flamethrowers. And they just opened up and set the Arab fleet on fire. And that's how they saved Constantinople. Anyway, that's why you should never turn away Syrian refugees. That is the rule on that one. Or is the rule you should make them. Sorry, I went to a dark place. All right, so in 750, there's a coup d'etat. The Abbasids overthrow the Umayyads. And they move the capital to a brand new city that they've just built on a village. The village is called Baghdad. It's a Persian village. And they move the capital to this city. They rename it Medina Tassalam, the City of Peace. And they build this amazing fortress system. It's a two-layer fortress system. It's incredible. The city should be impossible to capture. And science and commerce and philosophy pour into the city. Art pours into the city. And the city grows really fast and becomes a major city really quickly. But it's in Iraq, which was Persian, not necessarily ethnically, by the way. There was a huge Arab population in Syria during Roman period and a huge Arab population in Iraq already. What I mean is it was the Persian Empire. But there were also a lot of Persians as well because they were intermingled. Because you've got to remember, this is a pre-nationalistic society. It's before people went, oh, my DNA is better than DNA by virtue of my race or by virtue of my nation. Back then it was, I was born in this city and that makes me better than you. It was city discrimination, which is fun. We have that a little bit. Like whenever a Houstonian walks up to you, you know he's from. Anyway, so this means that the conversation changes. Because now it's got a Persian orientation because the Abbasids are surrounded by Persian bureaucrats. And those Persian bureaucrats have two agendas. One, to shift the attention of the Arab Empire east. And two, to destroy it. That is their goal. They are going to break this thing. The reason is, is because most of the countries that the Arabs conquered adapted and began to speak Arabic. Or at least there was a large population slowly starting to speak Arabic. Like Arabic probably didn't become the major language in Egypt until about 900 AD. But there was already a population of people speaking Arabic for commercial purposes and for political purposes by this point. The Persians weren't learning Arabic. They were holding onto their identity and their language. They had converted to Islam, but they weren't going to convert to being Arab. So right, ethnically Egyptians aren't actually Arab. But culturally and linguistically, they're 100% Arab. I keep running into conversations with people like, well, Egyptians aren't real Arabs. Oh, do they still speak ancient Egyptian? I miss that. I mean, they do. If you go to a Coptic church and listen to the liturgy, they do it in Coptic. Coptic is ancient Egyptian. Ancient Egyptian is as alive in Egypt as Latin is in Italy. You can hear it. It's not dead dead. It's just mostly dead. Right? And so what it means to be Arab is really more of a linguistic thing than it is an ethnic thing. It's not a DNA thing. It's do you speak Arabic? Well, the Persians rejected that. They refused. They resisted. And so little by little, they start to pick at the Arab empire from within, because they're the bureaucrats running it now. And pieces of the Arab empire start to come off. If I remember correctly, the first piece comes off, well, the first piece comes off in 756. Spain. One of the Umayyads escaped the Abbasids. They massacred the Umayyads. They tried to kill all of them so there would be no rivals out there causing them problems. Well, one of them got away. He snuck through Egypt. He went across North Africa. He went to Spain. And in 756, six years after the Abbasid revolt, he pulls Spain out of the empire. And so the empire is already starting to come apart in 756. I think 727 is the next time a major piece comes out. And that's over in Persia. And little by little, the Arab empire starts to disintegrate.

Eventually, it will lose all of North Africa and Persia. And as it's shrinking, the khalifa, the system where you had a person who was a religious and a political authority, is starting to become symbolic. And they're being replaced by wazirs. They're being placed by ministers. And so there's actually now a secular leader who's running the show. And the khalifa is becoming a symbolic leader who's mostly just confined to a palace in Baghdad and has no meaningful role other than to walk around the garden looking pretty. And by the time that happens, it also means that the person who has the best position symbolically to unify people has no political power, which is bad if you're trying to hold things together. I can't give you an exact date when the Arab empire stops functioning. But it's pretty finished by 900. I've seen the year 833 used as well. I think you can have an argument about when that's happened. By the time the Buyids are running Baghdad, it's over. There's no two ways about it. The Buyids were Persians who had broken out Iraq and a huge chunk of Iran and were ruling it on their own. And of course, the reason that matters now is if there is going to be a European invasion down the road, there isn't an empire to stop it. Well, there will be, because I'm going to have to introduce another actor, and it's the Seljuks. In 1037, a group of Turkish warriors begin to conquer the Middle East. And they create an empire to replace the Arab empire. And that empire is the Seljuk empire. So for the record, Turks are from Central Asia. They are in the same cultural linguistic group as Mongolians, Koreans, and the Japanese. I'm going to let you sit on that one for a moment. I take that in. Japanese, Koreans, Mongolians, and Turks are the same cultural linguistic group. Do this as an exercise. Find a Turk and stand up next to a Korean and have the Koreans start speaking Korean and have the Turks start speaking Turkish. It is crazy cool. It is very, very super cool. You should totally do this experiment. You can. They exist here in Austin. Just start looking for them. The Turks are starting to move into the Middle East for multiple reasons, one of them being they're serving as mercenaries. Another one is they're just looking for land to inhabit. It's a migration. There are immigrants coming in. And by 1037, they're politically in a position where they start conquering. And they end up conquering a huge chunk of the Asian part that the Arab empire had. I'm making this number up because I never measured it. But they probably ended up with about 30% of the Arab empire, maybe a little bit more. Maybe a third of the Arab empire. Let me introduce another actor, the Roman Empire. So I've said this before in lectures. So people who have seen my previous lectures will probably be annoyed with me because I'm just repeating myself. But I have to a little bit because I'm going to assume that you haven't. And that way it makes sense. When I was a kid, when I was an adult, I was taught that the Roman Empire fell on September 4, 476 AD. This is one of my big pet peeves about the way we teach history. The Roman Empire did not fall on September 4, 476 AD. That's just a lie. There's nothing even remotely truthful about it. What happened on September 4 is Romulus Augustus, the Western Roman emperor, took off his purple robes, stuck it in a box with a note attached to the box that said, we don't need two emperors anymore. We just need one emperor. And he sent it to Emperor Zeno. Emperor Romulus Augustus was in Ravenna, Italy. That was the capital of the Western Roman Empire at that time. They had long since abandoned Rome. The city of Rome existed. It was largely empty, though. It had 1 and 1 half million people at its height. And at that point, there were 40,000 people. Can you imagine walking through the streets of a city that at one point had 1 and 1 half million people and there's only 40,000 people there? Talk about ghost town. What was that like?

And of course, most of those houses and buildings have collapsed, and they're in ruins. But still, that must have just been a trip. We were great ones. What happened to us? This is terrible. And then you look at the coins, and they were striking at the time. And you're like, dude, what happened to your artists? They all died, too? Find some artists. So what happened was the Roman Empire fell on May 29, 1453. So when you were a kid, probably this happened. It happened to me. People would go, we don't know why the Roman Empire fell. Maybe it was the gladiators. They stopped doing the gladiating like centuries earlier. So probably not. Maybe it was the orgies and the eating festivals. They also stopped doing some of that, too. I mean, they still had a little bit of that going. But not as much as they did during the Republic. That was the height of that. You know what I mean? That was the good old days. So that's probably not it. Lead pipes. If lead pipes was a problem, we're in trouble. I don't know if you know this, but we have lead pipes in the United States. All the urban centers have lead pipes, as Flint found out. So probably not the lead pipes, either. For the record, what happens is hard water calcifies the inside of the lead pipes, and then the lead is no longer a problem because there's basically a salt layer inside the pipe protecting you from the lead. But then your city council decides they don't have enough money. Why? Because we went through a tax-cutting frenzy because somebody went, taxes are evil. They pay for things like water. What do you mean taxes are evil? Roads. Where do you think roads come from? Schools. Schools are also taxes. Hospitals, scientific research, police departments, fire departments. It's not the Libertarian Ferry that delivers that stuff. That's taxes. Unless you're lucky and you had a bunch of oil, like Texas does. Anyway, but it's OK. We keep our electric grid functioning just as well as Egypt does. So that's amazing. It's fun living in a third world country again. You know what I mean? It's very familiar. I go to Mexico in the summer so I have electricity. Also, by the way, it's cooler. Push that through your brain. I still can't get over that. I'm very confused about that. So I've derailed myself. Why did I go down that path? So here's what happened. I was taught we don't know why the Romans collapsed. But we do know why the Romans collapsed. And the reason we know why the Romans collapsed is because I can actually tell you the exact day the Romans collapsed. I don't know what it's telling me. Actually, it's telling me you need to go. The Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453. The reason why the Romans collapsed on May 20, you thought I was kidding, the reason why the Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453, and I can tell you exactly why, is because an Ottoman army captured the last Roman capital, Constantinople. Constantinople was the last piece of Roman real estate. In other words, there's no mystery why the Romans fell apart, the Roman Empire fell apart. It fell apart because it was conquered. And we know the exact moment it was conquered. In other words, there's no reason to have doubt about the date that the Roman Empire fell. Here's what happened. There was a guy named Hieronymus Wulf. About a hundred years after the Roman Empire fell, and I want to say a hundred years, but that's probably wrong, somewhere around 1550, right? The Roman Empire fell 1453. He decided he was going to rewrite history on purpose and tell a really big lie on purpose. He had two goals. One, he wanted to divorce the Roman Empire from its ignominious defeat at the hands of the Muslims. The Roman Empire was a Christian empire. He was a Christian. He was a German. And he hated the idea that Muslims had conquered the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire had been defeated by Ottoman Turks. And so he decided he was going to move the date of the conquest of the Roman Empire to a hundred years earlier, lie to everybody, and people would accept the lie because it would divorce the end of the Roman Empire from the Muslims.

And then the second goal was, in 476, Odo Vakur, the German, declared himself the king of Italy. Now, to be clear, he left Italy in the Roman Empire. He didn't separate Italy from the Roman Empire. So Italy just became, instead of a set of provinces, it became one kingdom with Odo Vakur, the ruler, who sent taxes to Emperor Zeno and flew a Roman flag. It's weird, but it also means Italy is still in the Roman Empire. But because Odo Vakur was a German, then Hieronymus Wolf could say, the Germans took out the Roman Empire. But it's not true. It's a lie. It's a bald-faced lie. So by the time we get to the Crusades, there's a Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire is playing a major role. And the reason the Roman Empire is playing a major role is it's been in decline for a long time. When I say the Roman Empire fell in 1453, you have to remember that's after 2,200 years. The Romans aren't quite as long as the Egyptians in terms of the length of their history, right? When the Romans conquered Egypt in 31 BC, Egypt was a 4,500-year-old civilization, right? It's not quite on that scale, but it's really close. It's half that scale. And Rome had been in decline since the 200s. In other words, Rome had been on its way out for 13 centuries. So for more than half of the length of time that Rome had been around, it was struggling to survive. That's what you call tenacity, resilience. That's incredible. Who survives barely making it for that long? At one point, they actually do get conquered. And they manage to put themselves back together and reconstitute themselves and just keep going. They break up on multiple occasions. Zenobia is my favorite. There was a woman who led a rebellion in Syria, and she captured Syria, Turkey, Palestine, and Egypt, and she made her own little empire. They were too sexist to let a woman rule, so she made her six-year-old son the actual emperor. But she ruled, and his name was Wabalathus. Wabalathus. Isn't that a cool name? Anyway, and by the way, Palmyra was her capital. So sort of a strange twist, right? She was like in the middle of Syria, made her capital there. Don't worry, the Romans killed her. Something like that's not going to be allowed. And they put the empire back together, and then it fell apart. It was like an accordion. The Arabs come, tear them up. The Germans tear them up. It's a mess. The Huns tear them up. The Bulgarians tear them up. It's just wave after wave until they finally just go down once and for all in 1453. But by the time the story of the Crusades is happening, the Romans are desperately trying to hold on to what is today Turkey. I'm going to use Anatolia just because I think it makes it a little bit less confusing, at least in my brain. Anatolia was the name at the time. Turkey is the name today because it's the Turks' habit, right? They've named it after themselves. Another actor I want to introduce might sound strange. It's the Vikings. I'm going to tell you something really strange. The Vikings are one of the reasons why the Crusades happened. Isn't that weird? You're like, wait, why? Work with me here on this one because it's kind of strange. So the Vikings were Germans. They were the Germans who settled Scandinavia. Scandinavia was kind of like the worst piece of real estate in Europe at the time. Today, obviously, it's like heaven. But back then, it was the garbage piece that nobody wanted to go to. In other words, the people who became the Vikings, they never called themselves Viking. Viking is a term we've retroactively put on top of them, like the term Byzantine that Hieronymus Wolf came up with for the Roman Empire's last 1,000 years, 977 years for those of you who want it to be more precise. There's no such thing as a Byzantine Empire. The Vikings, I'm going to use the term Viking anyway, though. The Vikings got stuck with this piece of real estate where you really couldn't grow a crop. So pretty much all you could do was raise cattle and go fishing. And at some point, their population had reached a threshold.

They had sort of reached the carrying capacity of cheese rolls and dried fish. And when that happened, they had no choice but to start looking for alternatives. And they took two approaches, by the way. One approach the Vikings did was they set out to start trading. They thought, you know what? We can fix our problem if we can do trade, because we'll have the money to buy the food that we need. And the Eastern Vikings, the Swedes, got so into this, they actually started trying to figure out where they could go to. And they started reading their sagas. This is the 8th century. Not reading their sagas. They were oral histories. They were listening to their sagas. And the sagas told the Vikings that the place the Germans were from was Iran. By the way, Kermani-Iran, which is where we get the word German, because ga and ka, when languages change over time, are interchangeable. So Kerman, German. We say German because we pronounce it like a French person would. But a German says German, right? So if you're saying the study of Germanic studies, it's Germanismus, because they don't say it the way a French person would. So the sagas tell the Vikings you're originally from Persia. So the Swedes go, wow, that's an idea. Let's go. Let's see what we can find. And so what they would do is they would go to what is today Latvia. They would take their long ships up the Dvina River. They'd go as far inland as you could get, pretty close to the city of Rzhev. They would pull their ships out of the water, fully loaded, because they have to carry their supplies. They can't leave the supplies behind. So they would carry these fully loaded ships over land until they got to the Volga River. I mean, that's a pretty manly, you know what I mean? Like, they've got their armor and their weapons. And they're hauling these. I want to go backwards in time just to see this. You know there was a lot of grunting. And then they put the ship in the Volga River. And they sailed the Volga River all the way to the Caspian Sea. And they went down the Caspian Sea to the Persian coast. And they're like, hi. And the Arabs had just conquered Persia a couple of centuries earlier. And they're walking around Persia going, what is all this? You have modern agriculture and modern medicine. And you're doing philosophy. And you've invented zero. And you're doing algebra. And the Vikings are like, we don't even have a written language. We shouldn't have left. We could have had this. And they began trading. Now, to supplement their trading on that long trade route, they would also raid. And they would attack the Slavic populations along the way. And they would take some for slaves. And then they would sell them into the slave markets, make a little bit of extra koi. So maybe that. Full disclosure, I'm a quarter Swedish. So if there's a little bit too much admiration on my part, it's just ugly nationalism. The Western Vikings started raiding England. And then they started expanding where they raided. And before you knew it, they were just raiding all of northern and Western Europe. And in the process, they start to get some amazing victories. So you know, London Bridge is falling down, falling down. That's because it did. That's because my ancestors took out London Bridge. That song is based on a real event. Isn't that cool? I think it is. And so the Vikings actually end up conquering places like England. They get multiple kings of England. Cnut the Great, of course, the most famous. But there's also Svein Forkbeard. Isn't that a cool name? Svein Forkbeard. And they end up ruling this empire that stretches across Scandinavia and England. And they were doing all right for themselves. And they got their eyes on Paris. And they thought, you know what? Let's go take France. I don't know why not. We've got Latvia and Estonia and Finland and Ukraine, right? Because the Vikings, eventually the Ukrainian nobles couldn't figure out how to rule their lands. So they started hiring Viking mercenaries.

The group of Viking mercenaries they hired were the Rus, R-U-S. And the Rus eventually created Kievan Rus because they realized they were the only armed guys. And they didn't know why they were taking orders from anybody. And they just took over. And that's how Russia was founded. Isn't that crazy? Anyway, they almost got Paris. Long story short, they were on the island. They were battering down doors. They were scaling the walls. They almost got Paris. It was so close. And so after they failed to get Paris, the French came out. And they went, OK, that was too close. You almost got us. If you get a second shot, we don't think we're making it. So what do we do? We're not surrendering, surrendering. We're not giving you Paris. We're going to make you fight for it if you try to get it again. But we really don't want you to try again. We're going to meet you somewhere. And they make a deal with a guy named Rollo. And the deal is Northern France. They give Rollo Northern France. Now the Vikings, I told you, weren't called Vikings. They were called the Northmen, or depending on your language, Norsemen, or Nordmen, or Normans. And so the Vikings named Northern France after themselves. They called it Normandy. And they began ruling it. But they had a problem. And that was that the French peasants wouldn't learn German. They wouldn't learn to speak the dialects of German that the Vikings were speaking. They kept insisting on speaking French. And so the Norman nobility, Rollo, by the way, got Normandy in 911. The Norman nobility now has to learn French so that when they're abusing their peasants, the peasants understand the abuse. It doesn't help to shout at a peasant and then they don't understand you. You need them to understand. So they learn French. And what that does then is it sets us up for a really strange set of events. Somebody gets a great idea just a few decades later, 999, so 911 to 999, so 88 years later, to hire Norman mercenaries in southern Italy. And so Norman mercenaries start to travel from Northern France all the way to southern Italy. And they're being used by everybody. They're being used by the Romans, who are trying to hold on to southern Italy. They had it. They're losing it. They're trying to get it back. The Roman emperor at the time is a guy named Basil II. You want to laugh, but he was one of the greatest Roman emperors of the time period. And he went on a conquering spree and he starts carving up territory that the Romans had lost and he's putting it back in, including taking lands, Muslim lands. He actually brings the Roman Empire back to Syria and he captures Antioch and the northern end of Syria. The part of Syria that today is in Turkey is basically what he recaptured. So when the Ottoman Empire broke up, the Europeans showed up with a crayon and a napkin and they just began drawing borders. And you look at the border between Saudi Arabia and Jordan or Jordan and Iraq and you're like, why'd you do that? And they sneezed or something. Somebody got bumped and an extra wiggle line popped up. And they did that with Syria. They just chopped off the northern part and gave it to Turkey. So Basel II is re-carving the Roman Empire, but at the same time, there's all these forces pushing back and everybody's using Normans as mercenaries. That must have been awkward. You see your cousin on the other side. How much are you getting paid? And you fight for a little while. I'll pretend to kill you, OK? Don't swing at me. What eventually happens is those Normans go, why are we fighting for these other guys? And in 1030, the first Norman gets made a lord in southern Italy. And he slowly starts to conquer. And subsequent generations of Normans start to take pieces of southern Italy. And in 1061, the Normans are getting on ships and they're crossing over to Sicily. And they begin conquering Sicily. Sicily had been conquered by the Arabs two centuries earlier. The Normans also start getting hired by the Roman Empire in Anatolia, because they're being used to fight the Seljuks, who are coming west and fighting their way into Anatolia.

And so the Romans are using these Norman mercenaries in, I showed you the coin of Romanus IV. In 1071, Romanus IV has an army at a place called Manzikert. And they fight a battle against the Seljuks. And they're defeated. The Romans are defeated. The Normans take off after they were defeated. They just move out of the way. But the Romans get captured, including Romanus IV. He was taken. The Seljuks offered a ransom. The Romans are like, no, we don't ransom you. And they replaced him. The reason that mattered was the Norman commander, Russel de Baerl, decides he's going to do in Anatolia, in the middle of Turkey, by the way, Galatia. So right in the New Testament, Galatians, those are the letters that Paul writes to the Celts living in Anatolia. He decides he's going to carve out a little kingdom for himself in Galatia. And the Normans go on a conquering spree. And they make Ankara, Ankara, the capital of a Norman kingdom in the middle of Turkey. There are French-speaking Vikings ruling the middle of Turkey, which is historically populated by Celts. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. Historically populated by Celts, you know, kilt-wearing, bagpipe-playing Celts, because everything is actually intermingled and there's no boundaries. And the next thing you know, the Roman emperor is actually turning to the Seljuks and going, dude, can you help us with this guy? And the Seljuks, the ruler, the sultan, the sultanate of Rome, that's what they call themselves. Their flag was a two-headed eagle. The Roman flag was a two-headed eagle. Because when Emperor Romulus Augustus takes off his purple robes and sends it to Emperor Zeno, they've now unified the west and the east. They only have one emperor. So their new symbol for the Roman Empire is an eagle with two heads, one facing left, one facing right. Well, the Seljuks in Anatolia take that as their flag because their goal isn't to destroy the Roman Empire. It's to make a Muslim Roman Empire. Their goal is to eventually capture Constantinople one day. They don't hate the Roman Empire. They admire the Roman Empire. They want to be the Roman Empire. And so Suleiman I, the Seljuk sultanate of Rome, gets a request from the emperor, the Roman emperor, to go put down this Norman uprising. And he's baffled out of his mind. But yeah, sure, I'll help you. And in 1077, that Norman little kingdom vanishes. In 1084, the pope asks for an army to attack Spain. Spain was, at that time, majority-controlled by Muslims. The furthest north city that the Muslims owned in 1084 was a city called Barbastro. And so the pope asks for a Christian army to go to Barbastro and take it. One quarter of that army was a group of Normans. When they capture the city at first, they're pillaging it. They're slaughtering people. But the Normans decide they like the place and they stay. And the majority of the population is still Arab and it's still Muslim. And the Normans who stay start dressing like the Arabs. And they learn Arabic. And they're really digging Arab society. And they go Injun. And they go native. And it shocks everybody because it's like, wait, these French-speaking, blue-eyed, blonde Vikings are in Spain learning Muslim culture. And in a way, when you think about it, all three of these events that I just described are like little precursor crusades. In 1095, the pope holds two conventions. Both of them were in November. And Alexius Comnenus, Alexius I, the Roman Empire, comes to Italy. And this isn't a small thing because Italy isn't Roman. In fact, the pope in Rome and the Roman Empire have had a falling out that has lasted centuries. And they hate each other's guts a lot, not a little bit, a lot. So what happened was, as the Roman Empire was disintegrating, they managed to hold onto pieces of Italy, including the city of Rome. But the pope in Rome didn't like that because the original church had five patriarchs.

So the Orthodox Catholic Church. Orthodox is truth. Catholic is universal. So the Universal Truth Church, that was the original name of the Christian church. It had already had a schism. The Copts in Egypt had broken away in 284. But in the 700s, the church was still unified. But the pope in Rome came to resent the circumstances because the five patriarchs were the pope in Rome, the pope in Alexandria, the patriarch of Antioch, and the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Jerusalem. In other words, the original Christian church had five heads, two popes, two patriarchs, and an archbishop. By the way, pope came from the pope would have his child on his knee. And then people would come to kiss his ring. And they would hear the child saying, papa, papa. And it just stuck. Do you want me to say that again? The pope would have his child on his knee. You know, his kid. His kid, because the original Catholic Church didn't have a celibacy thing. They did the celibacy thing later so that they could make sure that the clergy didn't pass churches and church property down in their wills and illegitimate children in Europe couldn't inherit. So that's how that, that's why that happened. It wasn't to stop the popes from having babies. It was to stop the popes from having legitimate babies. It wasn't to stop the clergy from having families. It's just to stop the clergy from having legitimate families so they couldn't pass on church land. So anyway, in 756, the pope in Rome is sick of the fact that he's kind of second fiddle. He wants to be first fiddle. After all, it's Rome. It's Roman Empire. So he goes and he makes a deal with the Franks. And they break Rome out of the Roman Empire. It's Pope Stephen II who does this in 756. 763, Naples was still in the Roman Empire. Duke Stephen II, two different guys, same name, makes it easy to remember. 763, Naples breaks out of the Roman Empire and joins the pope in creating this papal state thing. Naples is never part of the papal states, but the idea that it's now going to be a separate thing from the Roman Empire, it breaks away. And the animosity between Rome and Constantinople just keeps growing and growing and growing until 1058. In 1058, they get into a spat that's so bitter and so nasty, they start to excommunicate each other. The patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates the pope. The pope excommunicates the patriarch. Next thing you know, they're interdicting. Interdicting is when you excommunicate whole cities, whole countries, whole regions, whole provinces. They start interdicting each other. And before they're done, Western Europe has completely interdicted Eastern Europe. And Eastern Europe has completely interdicted Western Europe. And the East took the truth, and the West took the universe. And that's why there's a Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, and a Greek Orthodox church. So when Alexios Komnenos goes to Italy in 1095, it's 37 years after they had just done this to each other. So the wounds are raw. They're fresh. And the reason Alexios Komnenos is there is he says, we're not making it. The sultanate of Rome has just taken almost all of Anatolia. We maybe have 10% of it left. We're finished to the east, which means all we have is a little piece of Southeastern Europe. We need your help. And Pope Urban II goes, you know what we should do? We shouldn't just help you a little bit. We should go all out. Let's retake the Holy Land and put it back in the Roman Empire. And Alexios Komnenos goes, yeah, why not? Let's do it. Let's make this happen. And so Pope Urban II comes out of those two talks, meeting with these top officials, including the Roman emperor, and says, I want an army to go to Jerusalem. We're going to conquer all of that and put it back in the Roman Empire. Let's go. 1096, a guy named Peter the Hermit gets up in front of everybody and says, we heard the pope loud and clear. Let's do this. And he puts together what's called the People's Crusade. It's basically just a bunch of peasants, some knights.

It's not the mercenary soldiers. It's not the knight. It's not all knights, right? It's just some peasants. They turn into a mob. And the first thing they do to sanctify the Crusades, this holy religious war, is they attack the Jews living in Germany. And the estimate is they murder about 2,000 Jews, and then they rape like 7,000 more Jews. And then they leave Germany on their way to the Holy Land to... I missed something. I feel like they read a piece of the New Testament that I... Did I? Where does it say that? Before thou goest on the crusade, holiest of holy, do what Jesus would have you do, slaughter Jews in Germany. Did I? And that is the first pogrom. That is the first documented case where Europeans, specifically post-Roman Empire, the Roman Empire hated Jews. Just like it was a hobby for them. They mostly did it in Palestine, right? It was just, ah, the Jews again. They keep throwing rocks at us. That's going to be ironic in a few centuries. So that's the first pogrom. 1096. That army works its way all the way to Constantinople. When it gets to Constantinople, Alexios Komnenos, they've been raiding the whole way because they need to feed themselves. So they're sacking villages. They're tearing into people's food stores. It's a disaster. It's a raiding mob. It shows up at Constantinople. Alexios Komnenos is like, I got to get rid of these guys as fast as I can. He goes, you know what you got to do? You got to cross the Bosporus. Here's my fleet. He puts them on a ship and he sends them across the Bosporus and they set up a camp. They actually attack a town. They capture it. And he's like, I'll send you food. You just stay on your side of the Bosporus. This is going to work out great. In the meantime, he's actually calling the Turks on the phone. Hey, there's some crazy dudes. I just deposited them on your end. Good luck with that. The guy who's now the son of Suleiman I, his name is Khalid Arslan. He decides he's got to get rid of these guys. And they want to take Nicaea. So Nicaea is pronounced Nicaea. I'm going to not say Nicaea again for the rest of the lecture. It drives me nuts. It's like Julius Caesar is Gaius Julius Caesar. Stop saying Julius Caesar. I feel like it could be a salad dressing or something. You know what I mean? It doesn't have to be the name of that guy. Nicaea was the capital for the Sultanate of Rome. So they actually put it almost across from Constantinople. And the reason is because that's their goal. It's Constantinople. They're nowhere near capturing it. They know that. But that's still, you know, it's nice to have a goal, even if it's a far off one. And so they've got Nicaea. It's like poison. And the mob, the peasant mob, the People's Crusade, as it's called, thinks it's going to capture Nicaea. And Clege Arslan basically sets up an ambush for them and slaughters them. And that's the end of the People's Crusade, for the most part. By the way, some of the leadership got away. Because, of course, that's how that usually works out. In any case, the real Crusader army doesn't show up until the next year. The real Crusader army is a mixture of nobles from across France and Germany, primarily, but also Italy, because there's Normans coming. So for our purposes, there's a bunch of Crusaders. There's too many. There's too many names. So I'm just going to simplify it a little bit. The Crusaders you need to know about are Bohemond of Toronto, not Canada, but Italy, and then his nephew, Tancred, and Godfrey de Bouillon, and Baldwin de Bologna. Baldwin and Godfrey are both from northern France. They weren't actually Normans, but they had definitely sided with the Normans. Their father, Eustace II, in fact, was with William the Conqueror in 1066 when the Normans decided to also conquer England. The Normans were very busy people. Oh, let's go to Spain. You know what? I southern it. Anatolia. England. In other words, long after the Vikings started speaking French, they're still tearing up the planet. They're on this permanent, multi-century rampage.

And it wasn't enough for them that they had captured England already twice. They wanted it a third time. They're like, this is good real estate. We want it back. And they got it. And so when Godfrey and Baldwin go on this crusade, they're not actually Normans, but they're part of the Norman sphere. So in a way, the top four of the five most important Crusaders are Normans. The fifth guy is a guy named Raimond. He's Raimond of Toulouse, also known as Raimond Saint-Gilles. He was Raimond the Fourth of Toulouse. And they show up. And Alexius, there's also Hugh de Vermandois. There's a few other guys. But I just want you to know those five. They show up at Constantinople. And they swear an oath of fealty. Well, not Tancred. He refuses. He wants nothing to do with this. And what they promise is that all the land they capture will be handed to Alexius Comnenus, the Roman emperor. And of course, they're lying through their teeth. They have no intention whatsoever of handing anything over. Their goal is to go in there, carve off land, and make their own little personal fiefdoms. They cross over the Bosporus with the Roman navy. It's 1097. Khalid Arslan isn't there to greet them. He's in southern Turkey fighting another Turk. And the reason is that Turk was trying to capture a city from an Armenian, Malatya. And Khalid Arslan was worried if Danishmen captured Malatya, it would put his position, it would weaken his position. So even though he's got this crusader threat on the west, he's so focused on his rivals that he's actually fighting them. He turns around when he realizes the crusaders have landed. He goes as fast as he can. By the time he gets there, Nicaea has already fallen. He convinces other Turks in the area to fight alongside him. They fight the crusaders at Doraleum. And they're defeated. And Khalid Arslan has to withdraw. And they just watch as the crusader army passes. The crusader army then goes through Armenia. So when the Roman Empire lost Anatolia, a piece of the Roman Empire broke away and didn't get captured by the Muslims and remained its own separate thing. It was oftentimes called Lesser Armenia. It was a little Armenian kingdom on what is today the southern coast of Turkey. And so the crusaders arrived there. Tancred was the kind of guy who would look at a situation and he would size it up real quick. He decides to basically conquer it. And he just goes and grabs all the strategic points in Lesser Armenia. And in the process, he's running into Baldwin. Baldwin has the same idea, but he's a little slower. So he keeps arriving after Tancred has done this. And the problem then is Baldwin has the bigger army. So he shows up and Tancred has a problem. Do I fight my fellow crusader, who's basically telling me he's taking my thing from me, or do I walk away? So the first time he walks away, the second time he fights. The crusaders have barely started the crusade and they're already fighting each other. Not many people die for the record. I want to say it was like two guys died and a few dozen are wounded. And then they call off the fight and they negotiate and they make a deal. But still, you can see there's already problems. They get over the mountains, the Tarsus Mountains, and they arrive at Antioch. Antioch is the first prize. So Antioch had only just been captured by the Muslims in 1084. So by the time that the crusaders have arrived, it's 1098. They set up a siege. But Baldwin decides, ah, not interested. And he takes off to the east and he goes to a city called Edessa and he puts Edessa under, he tries to capture Edessa. He doesn't put it under siege. He tries to capture Edessa. And Edessa was ruled by Armenians. And so Baldwin goes to the Armenians and he starts working out a deal with them. The leader of the Armenians in Edessa was a guy named Thoros. And Baldwin talks Thoros into adopting him and then letting him marry Thoros' daughter so that he will become now the heir to Edessa. And Thoros goes, okay. Well, Armenian culture was that when you, presumably, one of the chroniclers says this.

I'm not sure it's actually true. That's one of the problems you always have when you're reading historical accounts. You're always like, mm, did that really happen? According to the chronicler, Armenian culture was when you got adopted, your adoptive father and mother wore a really big gown and then you would take off your top, you'd have pants on, and then you would crawl under the gown, but they're completely naked under, and you hug them. Anyway, so apparently that's what Baldwin did with Thoros and his wife. And then he waited around for a while until a mob grabbed Thoros and his wife and hanged them. And that's the birth of the first crusader state. We now have the county of Edessa. Baldwin is the first crusader lord to rule a chunk of territory. I think it was May 1098. In the meantime, the siege in Antioch is still going on. Bohemond is the guy who wants Antioch for himself, but so does Raimond. So there's now two crusaders both pushing for it, but the problem is they still gotta capture it first. They haven't captured it. The guy who was the ruler of Antioch was a guy named Yarhisian. And Yarhisian starts putting out feelers to see if he can get help to break this, the crusader siege. And there's two guys nearby. There's the guy who's running Damascus, because even though they're part of the Seljuk Empire, the Seljuk Empire is already coming apart at the seams. The Seljuk warlords don't like each other. They don't cooperate. They see each other as rivals. They're constantly backstabbing each other. And the guy in charge of Damascus is a guy named Dukak. And Dukak's brother, Ridwan, is the guy in charge of Aleppo. They hate each other's guts. They see each other as rivals. So Yarhisian sends for help from Dukak. Dukak takes an army, and he has to go past Aleppo, right? And he's coming up past Aleppo. He gets to line of sight of the crusader army. He panics. He turns around, and he heads back to Damascus. So Yarhisian is like, oh, what do I do? I guess I have to talk to Ridwan. But he doesn't want anything to do with Ridwan, because Ridwan has a group of allies that he didn't like. The Hashishans. The Hashishans were Shia who decided they didn't like the direction Islam was going in. Sunnis were systematically winning. The Seljuks were Sunnis. And the Seljuks had replaced the Buyids, who were Shia, and had been defeating the Fatimids, not replace them. The Fatimids were also Shia. And so there is this guy, Hassan al-Sabah, who decides he wants to take a different approach to fight for the Shia cause. And that different approach is he's going to get into political intrigue, spying, and assassinating people. And Hashishan is where we get the word assassin from. Now, whether or not they used Hashish, we don't really know. That could have been the chroniclers trying to make a story up. In any case, Hassan al-Sabah's followers were total fanatics. And Ridwan, the ruler of Aleppo, was totally into them. And they were friends. And they were working together. And so this scares Hashishan. So he doesn't really want anything to do with this. He asks Ridwan to send an army. And Ridwan does pretty much the same thing Dukak does. And nothing comes of it. So Hashishan realizes he's running out of food. He's running out of time. But so are the crusaders. The crusaders are literally starving to death. They've been traveling for months. It's a year now. And they're running out of supplies. And they've been slaughtering their horses along the way. For food purposes, they're down to like 800 horses. And probably half the crusader army is already gone by this point. Some of them died. Some of them got sick. Some of them broke a leg. Some of them just were like, you know what? I don't need this. And they turned around and they headed home. So now, you can see on the inside, Antioch is desperate because he's trying to figure out how he's going to get through this. And the crusaders like Bohemond and Rahamund are trying to figure out how they're going to get in the walls.

And at that point, another guy jumps into the story. And the other guy is the ruler of Mosul, Karbuka. Karbuka, this Yahishan convinces Karbuka to come with an army. But Karbuka has to pass Edessa on the way. And he's looking at Edessa. And he goes, this Baldwin has it. I want it. And so he stops his army. For three weeks, he parks it outside of Edessa. And then he decides he can't take it. And so he abandons the siege. And he heads to Antioch. But by the time he gets to Antioch, his generals are working against him. And so there's all this intrigue going on before he even gets to Antioch. But even though he's still heading to Antioch, it's kind of too late. Because in the meantime, because he took so long, because he added those three weeks, there was a guy named Firuz. Firuz was accused of dealing on the black market even though he knew and was a friend of Yahishan. And so he gets charged a heavy fine. He's so furious about this that he decides to betray his own people. Firuz tells the crusaders, I'm going to let you in to the city. The crusaders are like, why would we believe you? This is probably a trap. He goes, I'm going to give you my son. If it's a trap, kill my son. Crusaders are like, really? OK. Why are you doing this? He goes, I want land, gold, and vengeance. They go, OK. We can give you all three of those. And so in the night, he had access to a window that looked out over the walls. And he just dropped a really long rope down. And the crusaders came up the rope one at a time till there were about 500 guys inside the city. And they began fighting for the gate. Yahishan hears the sound. He panics. He jumps on a horse. And he rides off. He leaves his son and wife and family behind. He just takes off. He doesn't even assess the situation. He just figures, it's over. I'm out of here. He rides for days. He finally collapses from riding. His entourage try to put him back on the horse. They can't get him back on the horse. He's having a depression bout or something. He just lays on the side of the road. A peasant walks by, recognizes who he is, and cuts his head off and takes it to the crusaders and gets a reward. In the meantime, Yahishan's son, Shams al-Daula, son of the state, sun as in the thing in the sky, not child. Shams al-Daula, isn't that a cool name? Who would name their kid that? Anyway, Shams is beautiful, but of the state? Anyway, he's got the citadel, and he's holding on to it. He's like, OK, they've got the city. But he's also watching what the crusaders are doing in the city. They're not kind conquerors. They're not walking through and going, oh, hi, everybody. How's it going? They are murdering everybody. They're just going through the streets, slaughtering the inhabitants of Antioch. They're killing the men. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the poor. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the women. They're killing the babies. They're leaving nobody. And Shams is up there in the citadel going, what? Who are these people? Why are they doing this? Why wouldn't you want the city intact, somebody to tax, somebody to work for you? Why are you slaughtering the city? And there's nothing you can do about it except resist and hold on to the citadel. That's when Karbuka's army shows up. Too late. Shams actually sneaks out of the city to go meet with him to try and coordinate what's going to happen next. How are they going to fight for the city? Because he hasn't given up. Karbuka fires him on the spot. He goes, you're done. You're not going back to the citadel. He then sets up his army to fight. But the princes who are with him fear, Dukak and Ridwan, that if he succeeds, he will then be able to establish authority over Aleppo and Damascus. And so they actually pull off the field and start heading home. And when the rest of his army sees this, they lose heart. The crusaders see what's happening. They see them pulling away. So they come running out of the gate because the crusaders had just found the lance that speared Jesus.

The Romans check to see if he's dead by spearing him. Because if fluid comes out, it means he's drowned in his own fluids. Because that's the goal of crucifixion, is to drown you slowly. And they found the lance that did this. It's not probably, right? Probably what happened was a monk took a lance and buried it and said, I'm pretty sure it's somewhere around here. You guys should dig for it. They dig. They find it. They're like, it's a miracle. And they come charging out of the city towards Kabuka's army. His army's morale has collapsed. His morale has collapsed. They just turn and run away. And the crusaders don't pursue them because they think it must be a trap because they can't figure out why the larger army just ran away for no reason. And then they have their city. There's a brief struggle between Raimond and Bohemond. Bohemond wins. And Bohemond gets to keep Antioch. And then the rest of the crusaders go, we're not here for Antioch. We're here for Jerusalem. Let's keep going. Bohemond goes, I'm good. I got what I wanted. I just wanted one of the richest cities on the planet. Although it's not rich anymore because you just killed its inhabitants. Anyway, I don't understand. They start marching to Jerusalem. The next city they come upon is a town called Ma'ara. When they arrive at Ma'ara, the population fights as hard as they can. So it's soldiers and citizens holding onto the city as hard as they can. But eventually the crusaders get in and they capture the city. When they do, the crusaders murder all 20,000 inhabitants and eat them. So there's multiple sources that say this on both sides. It's always good to have both sides saying it. I know of three sources that are from the crusader side that say they ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. And they describe it in slightly different ways, but it's mostly the same. One of them says that they spit at the adults and the children and just roasted them over a fire. Another one says that they would cut chunks of flesh off of them and then roast the individual pieces over a fire. But it's pretty widespread agreement that the crusaders ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. But there's a lesson in this story that applies to today. So one of the things people will do who want to defend an indefensible position is they'll find something to nitpick. So one of the crusaders says that the people were tortured first, one of the crusader chronicles. But none of the Muslim chronicles say that the people were tortured first. And so what I've seen happen, even on BBC, is somebody will say, well, they may have eaten the people, but they didn't torture them. So first of all, I think if you slaughter 20,000 people, including the children in front of the parents, that's torture. But then second, I kind of don't care if that crusader's chronicles said there was torture and there wasn't or not, because I still think there was a horrible crime committed here. Why are you focusing on that one thing? So no Muslims are saying there was torture. Only one crusader was saying there was torture. Nobody's having an argument with you, dude. There's no, sure, there's no torture. They just killed them and ate them. The reason I'm bringing this up is you see this kind of nitpicking. Like, for example, with the Holocaust, Holocaust deniers, I have seen, focus on the number. So for the record, it wasn't 6 million Jews. It was probably 5.1 to 5.4. 6 million is a slight exaggeration. It's not a big exaggeration, but it's a slight exaggeration. So the Holocaust deniers would focus on the number. Well, it wasn't 6 million. If you just take the 5.1, you took away their ability to do this. And now you can, well, how about the 5.1? And then there's nowhere they can go, because that's the number. The 5.4 is also a number, possibly. But just go with the low. 5.1 is already a horrific, nightmarish, hellish, evil. It doesn't have to be 6. You see what I'm saying? It doesn't have to have been torture. We're good with it just being cannibalism.

So be careful when you're arguing, when you're dealing with people. What is that called? I feel like it's distraction. It's not gaslighting. It's a little different thing. It's like, yeah, but what about? Anyway, the Crusaders then approached Tarabulus, Tripoli. It was one of the wealthiest cities on the planet at the time. So was Antioch, by the way, but not anymore. Tarabulus had a library in it with 100,000 books. It was ruled by a qadi, as opposed to a guy who took the title of maybe king or something. It was ruled by a guy who had the title, basically, judge, which is kind of cool. And the city was rich. It had these big walls around it. The Crusaders set up a siege. There was no point. There was no way they were getting in. So they bypass it. And then they decide, you know what? Let's just keep bypassing. We have Antioch. We have Edessa. We have Ma'ara. Let's just go straight to Jerusalem. Why are we capturing anything else? So they bypass Beirut. They bypass Arsuf, Acre. They just don't deal with any of it. Sur, Fayda, they go straight to Jerusalem. When they get there, they immediately attack it. They don't have any ladders. They don't have any siege equipment. This city has a wall on it. It has a citadel. So the Crusaders just go like a mob, charging up to the thing. And they're like banging on. And the defenders are pouring oil on them, shooting them with arrows, going, they can't get in here. Why are they doing this? And hundreds of them are wounded and killed for no effect. So then the Crusaders set up a siege. The problem is that Jerusalem is brilliantly designed to not be siegeable. So all the sprigs are inside the wall. So the area around it is arid. So the army stuck trying to besiege this thing basically has to run a water line to the Jordan River and by bucket bring the water to the army. That's a tough thing to do. But that's what they're going to do. And they're praying. They're hoping that God will intercede and give them a break. And it may not have been God, but it was the Genovese. The Genovese show up with some English volunteers by ship. And the Genovese brought the material needed to build siege equipment. They build the siege equipment, and they attack the city. So a little bit of, I'm going to bring in another actor, another player. So Egypt had been taken over by the Fatimids. The Fatimids were Shia who had started in North Africa. They took over Egypt. By the way, they found Cairo, 969. Cairo is just barely over 1,000 years old. It's such a baby for the Middle East, right? Middle Easters go, oh, you're 1,000? Oh, you're so young. You're so young. Your whole life is ahead of you. Of course, Cairo is a mega massive city. It's the sixth largest metropolitan area on the planet. There's only three metropolitan areas on the planet that aren't in Asia that are in the top 10. Cairo, Sao Paulo in Brazil, and Mexico City are the three that aren't in Asia. Everything else is Shanghai and Tokyo and Calcutta. You know what I mean? So the Fatimids are doing all right, but something really weird is happening. The Fatimids hated the Seljuks, but the Fatimids liked the Romans. They were allies. So when this whole crusade thing happened, in the mind of the Fatimids, who had just lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks a few years earlier, what's going to happen is the crusaders, who are technically in the service of the Roman Empire, are going to split that land. Syria will go to the Romans. Palestine will go to Egypt. That's what they're thinking is going to happen. So they decide, let's go grab Jerusalem from the Seljuks before the crusaders arrive to do our part in this alliance. They have an explicit alliance with Rome. This isn't like they're speculating. This is the deal that they've made with Alexios Komnenos. And so they send an army. They defeat the Seljuks. They capture Jerusalem. And then they send an envoy to meet with the crusaders. And the crusaders just keep coming. And the Egyptians are like, what are you doing?

No, no, you stay on that side. That's the deal. We're going to split this. And the crusaders just keep coming. And it becomes clear to the Fatimids, they're going to fight. They're allies. So they dig in. And that's when the siege equipment comes and the crusaders break in. And the Egyptian general in command of the defense of Jerusalem, Iftikhar, is looking at this going, how do I fight this now that the crusaders have a sectional wall? And so he retreats his men to the citadel. Once they're in the citadel, there's nothing he can do for the population of Jerusalem. All he can do is he can hold on. It's basically a thorn in their side. He's going to make it so that the crusaders can't control Jerusalem, but they can control parts of Jerusalem. And he won't control any of the merchant part of Jerusalem, the commerce part of Jerusalem. He'll just have a military piece. And eventually, he'll run out of supplies. And their goal is to fight to the death. There's no point. They saw what happened at Ma'ara, and they saw what happened at Antioch. They know who the crusaders are. They're supposed to be allies. They're being backstabbed. They get it. But the crusaders really want the city. And so they start negotiating. And the deal that they come up with, Raymond Saint-Gilles comes up with, is the following, that the Egyptians will leave in groups of five. They'll leave the citadel, and then they'll exit the city five at a time. That way, if the crusaders break their word, turn on them, they'll only kill those five dudes who are in the middle of leaving. And then the guys that are still in the citadel, they can just keep fighting. And anybody who escaped has already escaped. And that's the deal. So the first five go, and then another five, and another five. And you know the last five were like, oh, god, you know they're going to turn on us. But they don't. And the last five get away. And then the crusaders go over to the gate, and they close it. They go over to the Muslim quarter, and they just begin murdering everybody. They're just walking through the city, slaughtering person after person. Tancred, the guy that I talked about, with the strategic mind who kept running into trouble with Baldwin until Baldwin took Edessa, he can't take it. He's like, what are we doing? He runs over to a group of Muslims who were running. And he's like, whoa, whoa, I'm not going to kill you. He hands them his banner. And he says, if crusaders approach you, say you're with Tancred. And show them my banner, and they won't harm you. And they're, of course, grateful. And then he just sort of runs around the city trying to figure out what to loot and how to save people's lives. He hasn't given up the looting. Don't be naive about this. But he's also like, let's not just murder everybody. And he describes in his own memoir, later on coming upon that group of Muslims laying there dead on his bloody banner. The crusaders didn't even care. They're just like, you're with Tancred? A group of Muslims realize there's no surviving this. This is over. So they decide, let's go to the mosque. Let's die praying. And so they barricade themselves inside the mosques. The crusaders eventually smash the doors open. They slaughter everybody inside. They get buckets of water. They wash the blood out. They go to the top of the minaret. They break the crescent moon off, and they stick a cross on top. They say a prayer. Boom. Insta-church. Then they go to the Jewish quarter. Because see, Jerusalem was in four quarters. A Muslim quarter, two Christian quarters, and a Jewish quarter. Why are the crusaders here? So that Christians can own Jerusalem. Because clearly they could be there if they had half the city. Not interesting. So they go to the Jewish quarter. And the Jews know what's coming. It's not rocket science here. So they just start running to synagogues. They figure, you know, let's do like those Muslims did. We'll die in prayer. The crusaders believed that Jews were so horrible, so evil, you couldn't wash out the synagogue afterwards and turn it into a church.

So they just piled wood around the synagogues and burned them to the ground, burning the Jews inside alive. And then they go to the two Christian quarters. And of course, at this point, the Christian population is peeing itself. Because it's just watched half the city get exterminated. And they go, you have the true cross, where is it? And the Christians go, we're not telling you. You're savages. And the crusaders go, OK, we got you. And they start murdering the Christian clergy. They're like, who's a priest? Let's have your priest. And they just start slaughtering the priests. They're like, when we're done, we're going to do the deacons. And then we're going to start working on your families. Eventually, somebody tells them, here's the true cross. Please stop killing us. And they stop massacring the Christians as well. But then they turn to the Christians and go, remember that great schism in 1058? These Catholic priests are your new priests. Get used to it. We're not doing that anymore. Your orthodox ways are out. And they're like, yeah, whatever. And that's how the crusaders captured Jerusalem. Isn't that a heartwarming story? Is that too much sarcasm? At that point, the Egyptians are trying to figure out what to do. They send an army to Ascalon with the hope that they'll eventually be able to come back and fight to capture Jerusalem back. Godfrey is named the new ruler of Jerusalem. He does not take the title king. So he's just the ruler. We'll get to that later. He takes his army. He runs to Ascalon. And the Egyptians were in disarray. They weren't expecting this. And so they weren't set up properly. And he attacks them within their disarray. And a bunch of them fall back. They drop into the fortress. The rest of them escape. And the crusaders get another win. They don't capture Ascalon. But they definitely humiliate the Egyptian army and buy themselves some time. The Egyptians aren't done. Their leader is a guy named Al-Aftal Shahanshah. Now, Shahanshah is not Arabic. It's Persian. But Al-Aftal is. The best leader of leaders is his name. Dude, if you have that as your name, you need to get into politics. That's incredible. That's incredible. Anyway, so Al-Aftal is actually a slave. Isn't that weird? And he's actually Armenian. So the guy running the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt, it has a caliph, a khalifa. It has a Shia khalifa. The guy running it is actually an Armenian slave. There's an actual khalifa who's a Shia Arab. But the guy running it, the wazir, is an Armenian slave named the best leader of leaders. And he's like, we're not doing this. He sends an army. They attack Ramla. Godfrey is dead. Godfrey dies. We don't know why. There's one person says that he was killed in battle. Another person said he got sick. Another person said he was poisoned. Godfrey's dead. He was literally the ruler of Jerusalem for a year. He's replaced by Baldwin, the guy that captured Edessa. He comes down. It's his brother. So the chronicler said that when Baldwin received the news, he was very happy, but also a little sad that his brother had died. And he comes down, and he's crowned king. And that's the moment in the year 1100 that the kingdom of Jerusalem is officially going, because there's now a king. But Godfrey was at 1099 when they captured Jerusalem. He meets Al-Afdal at Ramla in 1101. And he defeats the Egyptian army. The Egyptian army withdraws. They come back the next year, because Al-Afdal is not going to give up easily. They attack Ramla. And this time, they beat the crusaders. The crusaders fall to Jaffa. And in the second battle at Jaffa, the crusaders win again. The Egyptians withdraw. They come back in 1105 to do it again. They attack Ramla. And they're defeated a third time. And the Egyptians give it a rest. They're like, OK, we're exhausted losing. In the meantime, something really critical happens for the purposes of how the crusades are going to unfold. And it's the Battle of Haran. So Haran used to be called Karhaye.

Karhaye is where the Romans fought the Persians for the first time in 53 BC. And the Romans were, I mean, just summarily defeated. It was a catastrophe. 26,000 Romans against 8,000 Persians. And the Persians maybe lost like 100, 150. And the Romans lost like 13,000 dead, 10,000 captured. So the crusaders are going to do another Karhaye, only the city's been renamed Haran. And the Muslim army comes out to meet it at Haran. It's southeast of Edessa. And the crusaders are defeated. They are beaten in the field. And in fact, one of the crusaders is captured. His name is Baldwin. But it's a different Baldwin. It's not the king of Jerusalem. It's his cousin. I think it's his cousin. And his cousin's name was Baldwin Borsk. That's what's in my, Borsk, I think is what it was. And he's become the count of Edessa when Baldwin becomes the king of Jerusalem. And so he goes into captivity. And he's stuck in captivity for four years. And while he's in captivity, Bohemond himself also gets captured. And he ends up in captivity. So there's two crusaders that are now out of the picture because they've been captured. And then Raimon decides he wants Terabolus. So Raimon was probably supposed to become the king. But for whatever reason, he decided he didn't want to be the king of Jerusalem. He wanted to be the king of Terabolus. So what he did was he set up a siege for Terabolus after they captured Jerusalem in 1102. And he's built a fortress north of Terabolus. And he's fighting day after day. The defenders of Tripoli come out late in 1104. They set his fortress on fire. Raimon himself is severely injured in the fire. He survives it but dies like three or four months later from his wounds. So the crusaders have now lost basically three, four of their top crusaders. Godfrey is dead. Raimon is dead. Bohemond is in captivity. Baldwin, spoiler alert, who will become Baldwin II, who will become the second king of Jerusalem, is in captivity. So that's a weird story, obviously. And so they're in trouble. By this point, most of the crusaders have actually gone home. In other words, if the Muslims had just attacked in an organized fashion at that moment, there was nothing to stop them from just taking it all back. But the Muslims are in such disarray. And each of these Turkish warlords, these Seljuk warlords, hates each other's guts so much they just won't cooperate together. It gets so weird that at some point, 1108, there's going to be a battle. Baldwin gets released. And Baldwin is going to make a deal with the ruler of Mosul. And he's going to field an army. So it's going to be a crusader army next to a Seljuk army. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight against each other. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight Tancred. Tancred ended up becoming the regent of Edessa while Baldwin was in prison. Tancred doesn't want to give it up. He doesn't want Baldwin to come back. Tancred goes and he gets Ridwan, the guy from Aleppo. So there's a Tancred. The crusader has a Muslim ally. And they're next to each other in the field. And they're going to fight a battle against a Muslim crusader army. And by the way, they defeat Jawali and Baldwin. They have to escape. And Tancred basically keeps Edessa as a result. He's eventually talked into participating in the siege of Tarabulus. They're going to actually try and take it once and for all. And when he does that, he reconciles with Baldwin. But here we are. It's 1108. The crusaders just captured Jerusalem nine years earlier. And there's a battle where there's Muslims and crusaders on both sides fighting each other. Like, it's already gone sideways in every way you can imagine. And that's the first part of the Crusades. Having said that, there's so much more to this story, which is what I warned you from the beginning. Like, I am not going to get through the Crusades. I literally got you to 1108. By the way, my goal was 1125. But I think I'm basically out of time. So I'm surrendering and accepting I'm not going to get to my goal.

But to put things in perspective, the second crusade is 1145. The kingdom of Jerusalem is going to go down in a ball of flames. In case you didn't know that, I hope I didn't spoil this for you. But in 1187, after the Battle of Hattin. So then the third crusade is after that. And then there's a fourth crusade in 1202. And so in other words, the Crusades are just going to keep going for a while. And they actually don't end by most people's. The usual number we use is 1291. So it's 195 years. I've just covered nine of it. Well, 12 if you include the, well, even more. 13 if you include the peasant crusade. By the way, there's supposedly a children crusade in this. It's a lot of fun. The Crusades were great. I'm going to tell you the children crusade. I'm going to let you go. It happens later. So this is out of time sequence. But it's just too fun since I mentioned it. A group of children think if they go and just show up in Jerusalem, the Muslims will give it back. Because this is after the Battle of Hattin. So they don't, children obviously walking from France to Palestine is a little tricky. So what they do is they walk to Venice. And they show up. And they ask, will you, the Venetian Navy, just take us? And the Venetians go, yeah, of course. It would be our sacred duty to take you. And the children are never heard from again. They were sold into slavery. The Venetians just put them on the ships, took them to slave markets, and just. Isn't that just capitalism? I'm pretty sure that's just capitalism. All right. Thank you for your time. And if you want to come see my show and tell, I'll stick around to let you do that. And actually, you know what? I'll field a question. And then I'll let you go. How about that? I always forget to do that. I actually don't always. No? No questions? OK, good. We're done.

I have some stuff I want to do before I jump in, and I also want to talk about what I'm going to do when I jump in so that it's not a complete surprise. So one of the things I want to do, I have a lot of trouble with, which is it's self-promotion. So I'm going to pass these around, these are just bookmarks. It's advertising my novel, and I brought a copy of my novel. So I have a novel, and it's The Blood Throne of Caria, and the reason I'm pushing it, and it makes me feel dirty doing this, so I'm probably just off a little bit, is because I'm ramping up to try and put out another novel, and if I can get a little bump in sales before that happens, it helps me. So if you like that kind of stuff, get my novel. That kind of stuff is historical fiction. I'm particularly obsessed with basically everything from Iran to Italy. That's like my zone where I obsess about. This is set in the 6th century, 5th century, 5th century B.C. in the southwest corner of Turkey. And it's about a real person, so it's historical fiction, but she doesn't have, her name is Artemisia, she doesn't have a lot of, how should we say this, there's a lot of attacks done on her by historians, and so my goal in writing this novel was to figure out what was true and what was a lie, and then correct the lie. But I can't claim it's the truth because it's speculation on my part, so hence historical fiction. Somebody's going to ask at some point what they should read. This is a fun way to start, it's The Crusades Through Arab Eyes, wouldn't that be a novel idea, by Amin Malouf. It's an old book, it's 1985 if I remember correctly, but there, now I've done that part. I also want to dedicate this talk to a group of people, so it's a small list, but I just want to do this. Omar, Saeed, Iman, Iman, Iman, and then Hadi, I'm probably forgetting somebody else I intended. You know what, I'm going to throw Jayden into the mix, he'll be like, oh my god, I can't believe you threw my name in there. I actually have a, I was just gifted a piece of rock from Palestine from the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and so I'm probably going to hold on to it the entire talk because, well, my talk is going to take place in Palestine mostly, so this is kind of a strange thing to have right now. Also, let's see, what did I do with it, I probably already lost it. I brought show and tell, but it won't work because the camera is too small and you're sitting too far away. I actually brought coins from the time period, so I will, after the talk, you can come up and look at it, and then what I'll do is we'll put, for the people who are watching this on video, I'll just put pictures up on it, but just to give you an idea of what I have, this is a coin from William II. It's after the period I'm talking about today because I'm not going to get to him. William II was the king of Sicily. The year in my head is 1153, but who knows. Anyway, the reason I brought it was because I am going to talk about the Normans, and I'm going to talk about Sicily a little bit for background purposes, and I kind of wanted to stick this in your head a little bit. On one side, the coin is written in Latin. On the other side, it's written in Arabic because the Normans took Sicily from the Arabs, and so they just made it so that they were a bilingual society. This, let me see, hold on, I'll do this one here. This coin is going to matter because this is Romanus IV, the Roman emperor. I'm going to talk about him in a little bit of detail, just briefly, because he's going to set things in motion that make the rest of the story possible, and then when you look at the coin, you'll see that the quality of the coin dramatically falls when you get to Alexios Komnenos. Alexios Komnenos becomes the Roman emperor just like 11 years later, and the quality of the coin is terrible compared to this one, so it makes you realize how far into decline the Romans had fallen. One of the things I'm going to do is I'm going to do a little bit of background, and in the process of doing the background talk, I'm going to bring up the birth of the Arab Empire.

We don't know what year this coin was minted because it doesn't have a year on it. It's actually a counterfeit coin. The Arabs, when they made their empire, needed coins, and they went and stole a Roman mint, and they began minting coins, Roman coins, so it has Latin letters on the back. It has three Roman emperors, well, an emperor and his two sons on the front. They're holding in one hand a cross, and in the other hand a globus cruciger with a cross sticking out of it, so there's literally six crosses on this coin, and this is the Arab Empire, one of the Arab Empire's first ever coins. It was minted during the Rashadin period. We don't know a date, so I can't tell you who, but most likely it would have been Uthman ibn Affan or the Khalifa Ali ibn Abi Talib. It's probably not one of the earlier two, and then this coin is Muawiyah I. He did the same thing. It's a Roman emperor with two crosses in his hand, and on the back, Latin letters, and one of the reasons why I wanted to sink that into your heads is to also show how the boundary between things is really blurry, right? We're a society of people who want to put everything into categories, including ourselves. We can't wait to label ourselves, and we keep breaking it down further and further, and the reality is these categories are all imaginary and made up. Nobody is that easy to categorize, you know what I mean, let alone whole societies, especially societies where everything is blurred together. I probably have said Arabic words, for example, that are English in this. I wasn't paying attention, but you know, at one point I might say the word nadir or zenith or zero, and then by contrast, Arabic is filled with Latin words. For example, the word faloos, the word for money, comes from pholos. It literally was, one of those coins was a pholos that I was holding up, and so the word is actually Latin. It's not Arabic. It's just the Arabs used the Latin word. Cres, the word for cherries, comes from crassinus, which is the Latin word for cherry, and it can go on and on because everything is stuck together. All right, so as Eric Deggans would say, I'm going to do a bunch of table setting. Eric Deggans is a TV critic that I listen to on NPR, and he recently complained about too much table setting, but I don't know how to not do table setting, and the reason I have to do the table setting is if I just jump into the Crusades and start talking about it, it'll be entertaining because there's a lot of violence. Like, if you enjoy People Massacred, and I know you do because I watch the same movies you do, then this is a great story because it is gory, but it's kind of helpful to know why it happened, and how did we even get into the situation where it was possible. So I can't skip that. Having said that, I have no intention and no belief that I can, even if I wanted to, cover the entire Crusades. So in other words, this is part one. You're just setting this up now. I will try to do the entire Crusades, but I'm betting I'm going to have to do four parts. One of the reasons I don't know is, some of you have figured this out about me, I don't write my lectures out, so I actually don't know what I'm going to say until it starts happening, and so as a result, I don't know how the timing of this is going to land, so it'll be fun. I'm exploring this with you, and we'll see where it goes. It'll probably be a train wreck, and people will hate it, but it'll be fun for me anyway, and that's the important thing. All right, so, to do this, I need to introduce some actors. The first actor I want to introduce is probably the most important actor in the story, and it's the Arabs. And the reason they're the most important, obviously, is because the Crusaders are going to invade the Arab world to fulfill their goal of making a kingdom of Jerusalem. So, the Arabs created an empire that most people don't refer to, don't talk about, that's basically been deleted from history. It's the Arab empire, although I've frequently heard it referred to as the Muslim empire.

The reason you need to not do that and call it the Arab empire is the Arab empire was created by Arabs, like the Roman empire was created by Romans. We don't call it the pagan empire, and when it becomes Christian, we don't call it the Christian empire, right? When it becomes Japanese, we don't call them the Shinto Buddhist empire, you know what I mean? When Alexander the Great made his empire, we don't call it the pagan empire. So, why would we do this in this one particular case? And what I'm going to pose to you is the reason we usually don't even name it, and if we do, we sometimes call it the Muslim empire, is because of anti-Arab hate. We have that running through the core of our society, the core of our civilization, and one of the reasons is because of the events that led to the Crusades and the Crusades themselves. In other words, by doing anti-Arab hate, you're perpetuating this old wound. It's time to let it go. Although, by the time we're done tonight, you'll be like, oh my gosh, what's that about? So, it'll be good. The Arabs began making their empire, and by empire, I mean it in the true sense of the word empire. To be clear, a state that rules multiple countries and nations. That's all you need to be to be an empire. Having said that, you could claim that in the United Kingdom today, what's left of the great empire is still an empire, because Great Britain is Wales, England, and Scotland. That's three countries. And then, throw in Northern Ireland, Gibraltar, Bermuda, and the Falkland Islands and Malvinas, and you end up with multiple countries, right? Or at least pieces of multiple countries. So, they began making their empire in 633, when the first Khalifa, Abu Bakr, launches his armies into the Persian and Roman Empires simultaneously, in what should have been a completely insane, impossible, can't-be-done event. And it's not only done, but by 711, the Arab Empire became the largest empire on the planet to that date. There have been larger empires since, but there had never been a larger empire before this. It stretched, by 711, from Spain to Pakistan. It went all the way into Central Asia. So, if you can conjure a map of the Roman Empire, it owned about 60% of the Roman Empire. Conjure a map of the Persian Empire, it owned 100% of the Persian Empire. And it went into Central Asia, and it went into India. Fine? For those of you, because I just said Pakistan, for those of you who don't know, the British cruelly and sadistically cut Pakistan out of India. Pakistan is India. It's just, you know how the Brits are. It's divide and conquer, wreck, destroy, ruin. India is named after the Indus River, which is 100% in Pakistan. It's just cruel. You know what I mean? Anyway, so, this Arab Empire, by the way, when it was born, it had a tiny Muslim population. But by 711, it had a few more Muslims. It was maybe 5-10% of the population was Muslim. The empire itself was majority Christian, 60% Christian. In fact, probably somewhere around 60% of the world's entire Christian population was in the Arab Empire. Isn't that hard to comprehend? The majority of the world's Christians lived in the Arab Empire, an empire that was majority Christian. In 711. So, the empire has been around that, right? From 633 to 711, it's already been around for a few decades. It's not like it was just born. One of the reasons why Muslims are such a small percentage of the population is they didn't convert by the sword. There was no compulsion to become Muslim. At first, what the Muslim conquerors did was they said, if you're Christian or Jewish, you worship the book. Therefore, you have a pathway to heaven. So, you have to be treated like a full human. But then, as they kept conquering, they kept running into other religions. And they just kept extending it. So, the Zoroastrians, okay, yeah, why not? And, right, centuries later, by the time they're in India proper, they're like, yeah, Hindus too, it's all good. We're going to make this work. Right?

That was what kept happening. By the way, the Arab Empire in 711 was probably about five, ten percent Buddhist, just to mess with you. Afghanistan had a giant Buddhist population. So, it seems counterintuitive, but there it is. That empire gets into a conversation with itself. And the conversation it has with itself stems from a problem that they had. The Arabs had never ruled themselves, let alone ruled an empire, right? Until this moment. 633, the year they launched the empire, is the year the Arabs, for the first time in history, ruled the entire Arabian Peninsula. So, they don't even catch their breath. They conquer the Arabian Peninsula, put it under a single state, and then they just go, they just keep going. Next thing you know, they've conquered the Persian Empire, and they've conquered the majority of the Roman Empire, and they're in France, trying to conquer France. What was the Battle of Tours? 732 is in my head, I hope that's not wrong. So, this empire has a problem. Arabs don't know how to run an empire. They've never run an empire before. Normally, conquerors are arrogant, and they're cruel, and they're sadistic. Like, take the Romans. So, I'm part Italian. So, for those of you that like being mean to Italians, a little bit, but it's okay. Gaius Julius Caesar, the guy you incorrectly called Julius Caesar, when he conquered Gaul, there were three million people living in Gaul. When he left, there was one million people living in Gaul. He murdered one million, he enslaved one million, and then he looked at the remaining million and went, welcome to the Republic. By the way, we'd like for you to worship our gods. Let's have your taxes now. Oh, and we're going to steal your technology. That's what conquerors often did, right? The Arabs, on the other hand, were humble about this, and they told the Romans and the Persians they had conquered, we don't know what we're doing, we don't know how to do this. We want to just leave you where you are. You're a bureaucrat, you're running this province, don't stop, and then we'll watch you. Maybe we'll figure it out, but in a few generations, hopefully we'll have this sorted out. In the meantime, I'm going to counterfeit this money over here. It's got crosses on it, but that's okay. I'm okay with that. I like Jesus. And that was kind of their conversation. So, the reason that matters is Muawiyah, I showed you the coin. Muawiyah I moves the capital after a civil war that lasts five years, that ends in 661. He moves the capital to Damascus from Medina. When he puts the capital in Damascus, he puts it in a former Roman city. And that matters, because it meant that the bureaucrats around Muawiyah are shaping the policies he's creating, and it orients the Arabs in the Arab empire west. It orients them towards the Romans. And in fact, he's going to lay siege to Constantinople. He won't capture it. But then a subsequent Arab the next century is going to do it again, and they'll fail a second time. Had they captured Constantinople on either of those two, they would have taken out the Romans too, because they had already conquered the Persians. Yazdegerd III was the last Persian emperor. He's gone. Persians are done. But the Romans are still hanging on. For the record, what saved the Romans was the emperor put out a contest. He said, anybody who can invent something that can save us, I will give you a sum of money. A Syrian refugee, isn't that cool? Isn't that weird, a refugee? I thought we were supposed to put them in cages. Anyway, a Syrian refugee invented a flamethrower. So what happened was the Roman Navy had a chain blocking the vulnerable north end of Constantinople. They had a chain that went across, so the Arab Navy couldn't get through it. And the Roman Navy was hiding behind the chain, this big chain. And the Romans pulled up the chain, and the Roman Navy started coming out. The Arabs are like, why are they coming? We'll just sink them. This is suicide. And the Romans came right up on them.

And the Arabs had no idea they had flamethrowers. And they just opened up and set the Arab fleet on fire. And that's how they saved Constantinople. Anyway, that's why you should never turn away Syrian refugees. That is the rule on that one. Or is the rule you should make them. Sorry, I went to a dark place. All right, so in 750, there's a coup d'etat. The Abbasids overthrow the Umayyads. And they move the capital to a brand new city that they've just built on a village. The village is called Baghdad. It's a Persian village. And they move the capital to this city. They rename it Medina Tassalam, the City of Peace. And they build this amazing fortress system. It's a two-layer fortress system. It's incredible. The city should be impossible to capture. And science and commerce and philosophy pour into the city. Art pours into the city. And the city grows really fast and becomes a major city really quickly. But it's in Iraq, which was Persian, not necessarily ethnically, by the way. There was a huge Arab population in Syria during Roman period and a huge Arab population in Iraq already. What I mean is it was the Persian Empire. But there were also a lot of Persians as well because they were intermingled. Because you've got to remember, this is a pre-nationalistic society. It's before people went, oh, my DNA is better than DNA by virtue of my race or by virtue of my nation. Back then it was, I was born in this city and that makes me better than you. It was city discrimination, which is fun. We have that a little bit. Like whenever a Houstonian walks up to you, you know he's from. Anyway, so this means that the conversation changes. Because now it's got a Persian orientation because the Abbasids are surrounded by Persian bureaucrats. And those Persian bureaucrats have two agendas. One, to shift the attention of the Arab Empire east. And two, to destroy it. That is their goal. They are going to break this thing. The reason is, is because most of the countries that the Arabs conquered adapted and began to speak Arabic. Or at least there was a large population slowly starting to speak Arabic. Like Arabic probably didn't become the major language in Egypt until about 900 AD. But there was already a population of people speaking Arabic for commercial purposes and for political purposes by this point. The Persians weren't learning Arabic. They were holding onto their identity and their language. They had converted to Islam, but they weren't going to convert to being Arab. So right, ethnically Egyptians aren't actually Arab. But culturally and linguistically, they're 100% Arab. I keep running into conversations with people like, well, Egyptians aren't real Arabs. Oh, do they still speak ancient Egyptian? I miss that. I mean, they do. If you go to a Coptic church and listen to the liturgy, they do it in Coptic. Coptic is ancient Egyptian. Ancient Egyptian is as alive in Egypt as Latin is in Italy. You can hear it. It's not dead dead. It's just mostly dead. Right? And so what it means to be Arab is really more of a linguistic thing than it is an ethnic thing. It's not a DNA thing. It's do you speak Arabic? Well, the Persians rejected that. They refused. They resisted. And so little by little, they start to pick at the Arab empire from within, because they're the bureaucrats running it now. And pieces of the Arab empire start to come off. If I remember correctly, the first piece comes off, well, the first piece comes off in 756. Spain. One of the Umayyads escaped the Abbasids. They massacred the Umayyads. They tried to kill all of them so there would be no rivals out there causing them problems. Well, one of them got away. He snuck through Egypt. He went across North Africa. He went to Spain. And in 756, six years after the Abbasid revolt, he pulls Spain out of the empire. And so the empire is already starting to come apart in 756. I think 727 is the next time a major piece comes out. And that's over in Persia. And little by little, the Arab empire starts to disintegrate.

Eventually, it will lose all of North Africa and Persia. And as it's shrinking, the khalifa, the system where you had a person who was a religious and a political authority, is starting to become symbolic. And they're being replaced by wazirs. They're being placed by ministers. And so there's actually now a secular leader who's running the show. And the khalifa is becoming a symbolic leader who's mostly just confined to a palace in Baghdad and has no meaningful role other than to walk around the garden looking pretty. And by the time that happens, it also means that the person who has the best position symbolically to unify people has no political power, which is bad if you're trying to hold things together. I can't give you an exact date when the Arab empire stops functioning. But it's pretty finished by 900. I've seen the year 833 used as well. I think you can have an argument about when that's happened. By the time the Buyids are running Baghdad, it's over. There's no two ways about it. The Buyids were Persians who had broken out Iraq and a huge chunk of Iran and were ruling it on their own. And of course, the reason that matters now is if there is going to be a European invasion down the road, there isn't an empire to stop it. Well, there will be, because I'm going to have to introduce another actor, and it's the Seljuks. In 1037, a group of Turkish warriors begin to conquer the Middle East. And they create an empire to replace the Arab empire. And that empire is the Seljuk empire. So for the record, Turks are from Central Asia. They are in the same cultural linguistic group as Mongolians, Koreans, and the Japanese. I'm going to let you sit on that one for a moment. I take that in. Japanese, Koreans, Mongolians, and Turks are the same cultural linguistic group. Do this as an exercise. Find a Turk and stand up next to a Korean and have the Koreans start speaking Korean and have the Turks start speaking Turkish. It is crazy cool. It is very, very super cool. You should totally do this experiment. You can. They exist here in Austin. Just start looking for them. The Turks are starting to move into the Middle East for multiple reasons, one of them being they're serving as mercenaries. Another one is they're just looking for land to inhabit. It's a migration. There are immigrants coming in. And by 1037, they're politically in a position where they start conquering. And they end up conquering a huge chunk of the Asian part that the Arab empire had. I'm making this number up because I never measured it. But they probably ended up with about 30% of the Arab empire, maybe a little bit more. Maybe a third of the Arab empire. Let me introduce another actor, the Roman Empire. So I've said this before in lectures. So people who have seen my previous lectures will probably be annoyed with me because I'm just repeating myself. But I have to a little bit because I'm going to assume that you haven't. And that way it makes sense. When I was a kid, when I was an adult, I was taught that the Roman Empire fell on September 4, 476 AD. This is one of my big pet peeves about the way we teach history. The Roman Empire did not fall on September 4, 476 AD. That's just a lie. There's nothing even remotely truthful about it. What happened on September 4 is Romulus Augustus, the Western Roman emperor, took off his purple robes, stuck it in a box with a note attached to the box that said, we don't need two emperors anymore. We just need one emperor. And he sent it to Emperor Zeno. Emperor Romulus Augustus was in Ravenna, Italy. That was the capital of the Western Roman Empire at that time. They had long since abandoned Rome. The city of Rome existed. It was largely empty, though. It had 1 and 1 half million people at its height. And at that point, there were 40,000 people. Can you imagine walking through the streets of a city that at one point had 1 and 1 half million people and there's only 40,000 people there? Talk about ghost town. What was that like?

And of course, most of those houses and buildings have collapsed, and they're in ruins. But still, that must have just been a trip. We were great ones. What happened to us? This is terrible. And then you look at the coins, and they were striking at the time. And you're like, dude, what happened to your artists? They all died, too? Find some artists. So what happened was the Roman Empire fell on May 29, 1453. So when you were a kid, probably this happened. It happened to me. People would go, we don't know why the Roman Empire fell. Maybe it was the gladiators. They stopped doing the gladiating like centuries earlier. So probably not. Maybe it was the orgies and the eating festivals. They also stopped doing some of that, too. I mean, they still had a little bit of that going. But not as much as they did during the Republic. That was the height of that. You know what I mean? That was the good old days. So that's probably not it. Lead pipes. If lead pipes was a problem, we're in trouble. I don't know if you know this, but we have lead pipes in the United States. All the urban centers have lead pipes, as Flint found out. So probably not the lead pipes, either. For the record, what happens is hard water calcifies the inside of the lead pipes, and then the lead is no longer a problem because there's basically a salt layer inside the pipe protecting you from the lead. But then your city council decides they don't have enough money. Why? Because we went through a tax-cutting frenzy because somebody went, taxes are evil. They pay for things like water. What do you mean taxes are evil? Roads. Where do you think roads come from? Schools. Schools are also taxes. Hospitals, scientific research, police departments, fire departments. It's not the Libertarian Ferry that delivers that stuff. That's taxes. Unless you're lucky and you had a bunch of oil, like Texas does. Anyway, but it's OK. We keep our electric grid functioning just as well as Egypt does. So that's amazing. It's fun living in a third world country again. You know what I mean? It's very familiar. I go to Mexico in the summer so I have electricity. Also, by the way, it's cooler. Push that through your brain. I still can't get over that. I'm very confused about that. So I've derailed myself. Why did I go down that path? So here's what happened. I was taught we don't know why the Romans collapsed. But we do know why the Romans collapsed. And the reason we know why the Romans collapsed is because I can actually tell you the exact day the Romans collapsed. I don't know what it's telling me. Actually, it's telling me you need to go. The Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453. The reason why the Romans collapsed on May 20, you thought I was kidding, the reason why the Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453, and I can tell you exactly why, is because an Ottoman army captured the last Roman capital, Constantinople. Constantinople was the last piece of Roman real estate. In other words, there's no mystery why the Romans fell apart, the Roman Empire fell apart. It fell apart because it was conquered. And we know the exact moment it was conquered. In other words, there's no reason to have doubt about the date that the Roman Empire fell. Here's what happened. There was a guy named Hieronymus Wulf. About a hundred years after the Roman Empire fell, and I want to say a hundred years, but that's probably wrong, somewhere around 1550, right? The Roman Empire fell 1453. He decided he was going to rewrite history on purpose and tell a really big lie on purpose. He had two goals. One, he wanted to divorce the Roman Empire from its ignominious defeat at the hands of the Muslims. The Roman Empire was a Christian empire. He was a Christian. He was a German. And he hated the idea that Muslims had conquered the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire had been defeated by Ottoman Turks. And so he decided he was going to move the date of the conquest of the Roman Empire to a hundred years earlier, lie to everybody, and people would accept the lie because it would divorce the end of the Roman Empire from the Muslims.

And then the second goal was, in 476, Odo Vakur, the German, declared himself the king of Italy. Now, to be clear, he left Italy in the Roman Empire. He didn't separate Italy from the Roman Empire. So Italy just became, instead of a set of provinces, it became one kingdom with Odo Vakur, the ruler, who sent taxes to Emperor Zeno and flew a Roman flag. It's weird, but it also means Italy is still in the Roman Empire. But because Odo Vakur was a German, then Hieronymus Wolf could say, the Germans took out the Roman Empire. But it's not true. It's a lie. It's a bald-faced lie. So by the time we get to the Crusades, there's a Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire is playing a major role. And the reason the Roman Empire is playing a major role is it's been in decline for a long time. When I say the Roman Empire fell in 1453, you have to remember that's after 2,200 years. The Romans aren't quite as long as the Egyptians in terms of the length of their history, right? When the Romans conquered Egypt in 31 BC, Egypt was a 4,500-year-old civilization, right? It's not quite on that scale, but it's really close. It's half that scale. And Rome had been in decline since the 200s. In other words, Rome had been on its way out for 13 centuries. So for more than half of the length of time that Rome had been around, it was struggling to survive. That's what you call tenacity, resilience. That's incredible. Who survives barely making it for that long? At one point, they actually do get conquered. And they manage to put themselves back together and reconstitute themselves and just keep going. They break up on multiple occasions. Zenobia is my favorite. There was a woman who led a rebellion in Syria, and she captured Syria, Turkey, Palestine, and Egypt, and she made her own little empire. They were too sexist to let a woman rule, so she made her six-year-old son the actual emperor. But she ruled, and his name was Wabalathus. Wabalathus. Isn't that a cool name? Anyway, and by the way, Palmyra was her capital. So sort of a strange twist, right? She was like in the middle of Syria, made her capital there. Don't worry, the Romans killed her. Something like that's not going to be allowed. And they put the empire back together, and then it fell apart. It was like an accordion. The Arabs come, tear them up. The Germans tear them up. It's a mess. The Huns tear them up. The Bulgarians tear them up. It's just wave after wave until they finally just go down once and for all in 1453. But by the time the story of the Crusades is happening, the Romans are desperately trying to hold on to what is today Turkey. I'm going to use Anatolia just because I think it makes it a little bit less confusing, at least in my brain. Anatolia was the name at the time. Turkey is the name today because it's the Turks' habit, right? They've named it after themselves. Another actor I want to introduce might sound strange. It's the Vikings. I'm going to tell you something really strange. The Vikings are one of the reasons why the Crusades happened. Isn't that weird? You're like, wait, why? Work with me here on this one because it's kind of strange. So the Vikings were Germans. They were the Germans who settled Scandinavia. Scandinavia was kind of like the worst piece of real estate in Europe at the time. Today, obviously, it's like heaven. But back then, it was the garbage piece that nobody wanted to go to. In other words, the people who became the Vikings, they never called themselves Viking. Viking is a term we've retroactively put on top of them, like the term Byzantine that Hieronymus Wolf came up with for the Roman Empire's last 1,000 years, 977 years for those of you who want it to be more precise. There's no such thing as a Byzantine Empire. The Vikings, I'm going to use the term Viking anyway, though. The Vikings got stuck with this piece of real estate where you really couldn't grow a crop. So pretty much all you could do was raise cattle and go fishing. And at some point, their population had reached a threshold.

They had sort of reached the carrying capacity of cheese rolls and dried fish. And when that happened, they had no choice but to start looking for alternatives. And they took two approaches, by the way. One approach the Vikings did was they set out to start trading. They thought, you know what? We can fix our problem if we can do trade, because we'll have the money to buy the food that we need. And the Eastern Vikings, the Swedes, got so into this, they actually started trying to figure out where they could go to. And they started reading their sagas. This is the 8th century. Not reading their sagas. They were oral histories. They were listening to their sagas. And the sagas told the Vikings that the place the Germans were from was Iran. By the way, Kermani-Iran, which is where we get the word German, because ga and ka, when languages change over time, are interchangeable. So Kerman, German. We say German because we pronounce it like a French person would. But a German says German, right? So if you're saying the study of Germanic studies, it's Germanismus, because they don't say it the way a French person would. So the sagas tell the Vikings you're originally from Persia. So the Swedes go, wow, that's an idea. Let's go. Let's see what we can find. And so what they would do is they would go to what is today Latvia. They would take their long ships up the Dvina River. They'd go as far inland as you could get, pretty close to the city of Rzhev. They would pull their ships out of the water, fully loaded, because they have to carry their supplies. They can't leave the supplies behind. So they would carry these fully loaded ships over land until they got to the Volga River. I mean, that's a pretty manly, you know what I mean? Like, they've got their armor and their weapons. And they're hauling these. I want to go backwards in time just to see this. You know there was a lot of grunting. And then they put the ship in the Volga River. And they sailed the Volga River all the way to the Caspian Sea. And they went down the Caspian Sea to the Persian coast. And they're like, hi. And the Arabs had just conquered Persia a couple of centuries earlier. And they're walking around Persia going, what is all this? You have modern agriculture and modern medicine. And you're doing philosophy. And you've invented zero. And you're doing algebra. And the Vikings are like, we don't even have a written language. We shouldn't have left. We could have had this. And they began trading. Now, to supplement their trading on that long trade route, they would also raid. And they would attack the Slavic populations along the way. And they would take some for slaves. And then they would sell them into the slave markets, make a little bit of extra koi. So maybe that. Full disclosure, I'm a quarter Swedish. So if there's a little bit too much admiration on my part, it's just ugly nationalism. The Western Vikings started raiding England. And then they started expanding where they raided. And before you knew it, they were just raiding all of northern and Western Europe. And in the process, they start to get some amazing victories. So you know, London Bridge is falling down, falling down. That's because it did. That's because my ancestors took out London Bridge. That song is based on a real event. Isn't that cool? I think it is. And so the Vikings actually end up conquering places like England. They get multiple kings of England. Cnut the Great, of course, the most famous. But there's also Svein Forkbeard. Isn't that a cool name? Svein Forkbeard. And they end up ruling this empire that stretches across Scandinavia and England. And they were doing all right for themselves. And they got their eyes on Paris. And they thought, you know what? Let's go take France. I don't know why not. We've got Latvia and Estonia and Finland and Ukraine, right? Because the Vikings, eventually the Ukrainian nobles couldn't figure out how to rule their lands. So they started hiring Viking mercenaries.

The group of Viking mercenaries they hired were the Rus, R-U-S. And the Rus eventually created Kievan Rus because they realized they were the only armed guys. And they didn't know why they were taking orders from anybody. And they just took over. And that's how Russia was founded. Isn't that crazy? Anyway, they almost got Paris. Long story short, they were on the island. They were battering down doors. They were scaling the walls. They almost got Paris. It was so close. And so after they failed to get Paris, the French came out. And they went, OK, that was too close. You almost got us. If you get a second shot, we don't think we're making it. So what do we do? We're not surrendering, surrendering. We're not giving you Paris. We're going to make you fight for it if you try to get it again. But we really don't want you to try again. We're going to meet you somewhere. And they make a deal with a guy named Rollo. And the deal is Northern France. They give Rollo Northern France. Now the Vikings, I told you, weren't called Vikings. They were called the Northmen, or depending on your language, Norsemen, or Nordmen, or Normans. And so the Vikings named Northern France after themselves. They called it Normandy. And they began ruling it. But they had a problem. And that was that the French peasants wouldn't learn German. They wouldn't learn to speak the dialects of German that the Vikings were speaking. They kept insisting on speaking French. And so the Norman nobility, Rollo, by the way, got Normandy in 911. The Norman nobility now has to learn French so that when they're abusing their peasants, the peasants understand the abuse. It doesn't help to shout at a peasant and then they don't understand you. You need them to understand. So they learn French. And what that does then is it sets us up for a really strange set of events. Somebody gets a great idea just a few decades later, 999, so 911 to 999, so 88 years later, to hire Norman mercenaries in southern Italy. And so Norman mercenaries start to travel from Northern France all the way to southern Italy. And they're being used by everybody. They're being used by the Romans, who are trying to hold on to southern Italy. They had it. They're losing it. They're trying to get it back. The Roman emperor at the time is a guy named Basil II. You want to laugh, but he was one of the greatest Roman emperors of the time period. And he went on a conquering spree and he starts carving up territory that the Romans had lost and he's putting it back in, including taking lands, Muslim lands. He actually brings the Roman Empire back to Syria and he captures Antioch and the northern end of Syria. The part of Syria that today is in Turkey is basically what he recaptured. So when the Ottoman Empire broke up, the Europeans showed up with a crayon and a napkin and they just began drawing borders. And you look at the border between Saudi Arabia and Jordan or Jordan and Iraq and you're like, why'd you do that? And they sneezed or something. Somebody got bumped and an extra wiggle line popped up. And they did that with Syria. They just chopped off the northern part and gave it to Turkey. So Basel II is re-carving the Roman Empire, but at the same time, there's all these forces pushing back and everybody's using Normans as mercenaries. That must have been awkward. You see your cousin on the other side. How much are you getting paid? And you fight for a little while. I'll pretend to kill you, OK? Don't swing at me. What eventually happens is those Normans go, why are we fighting for these other guys? And in 1030, the first Norman gets made a lord in southern Italy. And he slowly starts to conquer. And subsequent generations of Normans start to take pieces of southern Italy. And in 1061, the Normans are getting on ships and they're crossing over to Sicily. And they begin conquering Sicily. Sicily had been conquered by the Arabs two centuries earlier. The Normans also start getting hired by the Roman Empire in Anatolia, because they're being used to fight the Seljuks, who are coming west and fighting their way into Anatolia.

And so the Romans are using these Norman mercenaries in, I showed you the coin of Romanus IV. In 1071, Romanus IV has an army at a place called Manzikert. And they fight a battle against the Seljuks. And they're defeated. The Romans are defeated. The Normans take off after they were defeated. They just move out of the way. But the Romans get captured, including Romanus IV. He was taken. The Seljuks offered a ransom. The Romans are like, no, we don't ransom you. And they replaced him. The reason that mattered was the Norman commander, Russel de Baerl, decides he's going to do in Anatolia, in the middle of Turkey, by the way, Galatia. So right in the New Testament, Galatians, those are the letters that Paul writes to the Celts living in Anatolia. He decides he's going to carve out a little kingdom for himself in Galatia. And the Normans go on a conquering spree. And they make Ankara, Ankara, the capital of a Norman kingdom in the middle of Turkey. There are French-speaking Vikings ruling the middle of Turkey, which is historically populated by Celts. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. Historically populated by Celts, you know, kilt-wearing, bagpipe-playing Celts, because everything is actually intermingled and there's no boundaries. And the next thing you know, the Roman emperor is actually turning to the Seljuks and going, dude, can you help us with this guy? And the Seljuks, the ruler, the sultan, the sultanate of Rome, that's what they call themselves. Their flag was a two-headed eagle. The Roman flag was a two-headed eagle. Because when Emperor Romulus Augustus takes off his purple robes and sends it to Emperor Zeno, they've now unified the west and the east. They only have one emperor. So their new symbol for the Roman Empire is an eagle with two heads, one facing left, one facing right. Well, the Seljuks in Anatolia take that as their flag because their goal isn't to destroy the Roman Empire. It's to make a Muslim Roman Empire. Their goal is to eventually capture Constantinople one day. They don't hate the Roman Empire. They admire the Roman Empire. They want to be the Roman Empire. And so Suleiman I, the Seljuk sultanate of Rome, gets a request from the emperor, the Roman emperor, to go put down this Norman uprising. And he's baffled out of his mind. But yeah, sure, I'll help you. And in 1077, that Norman little kingdom vanishes. In 1084, the pope asks for an army to attack Spain. Spain was, at that time, majority-controlled by Muslims. The furthest north city that the Muslims owned in 1084 was a city called Barbastro. And so the pope asks for a Christian army to go to Barbastro and take it. One quarter of that army was a group of Normans. When they capture the city at first, they're pillaging it. They're slaughtering people. But the Normans decide they like the place and they stay. And the majority of the population is still Arab and it's still Muslim. And the Normans who stay start dressing like the Arabs. And they learn Arabic. And they're really digging Arab society. And they go Injun. And they go native. And it shocks everybody because it's like, wait, these French-speaking, blue-eyed, blonde Vikings are in Spain learning Muslim culture. And in a way, when you think about it, all three of these events that I just described are like little precursor crusades. In 1095, the pope holds two conventions. Both of them were in November. And Alexius Comnenus, Alexius I, the Roman Empire, comes to Italy. And this isn't a small thing because Italy isn't Roman. In fact, the pope in Rome and the Roman Empire have had a falling out that has lasted centuries. And they hate each other's guts a lot, not a little bit, a lot. So what happened was, as the Roman Empire was disintegrating, they managed to hold onto pieces of Italy, including the city of Rome. But the pope in Rome didn't like that because the original church had five patriarchs.

So the Orthodox Catholic Church. Orthodox is truth. Catholic is universal. So the Universal Truth Church, that was the original name of the Christian church. It had already had a schism. The Copts in Egypt had broken away in 284. But in the 700s, the church was still unified. But the pope in Rome came to resent the circumstances because the five patriarchs were the pope in Rome, the pope in Alexandria, the patriarch of Antioch, and the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Jerusalem. In other words, the original Christian church had five heads, two popes, two patriarchs, and an archbishop. By the way, pope came from the pope would have his child on his knee. And then people would come to kiss his ring. And they would hear the child saying, papa, papa. And it just stuck. Do you want me to say that again? The pope would have his child on his knee. You know, his kid. His kid, because the original Catholic Church didn't have a celibacy thing. They did the celibacy thing later so that they could make sure that the clergy didn't pass churches and church property down in their wills and illegitimate children in Europe couldn't inherit. So that's how that, that's why that happened. It wasn't to stop the popes from having babies. It was to stop the popes from having legitimate babies. It wasn't to stop the clergy from having families. It's just to stop the clergy from having legitimate families so they couldn't pass on church land. So anyway, in 756, the pope in Rome is sick of the fact that he's kind of second fiddle. He wants to be first fiddle. After all, it's Rome. It's Roman Empire. So he goes and he makes a deal with the Franks. And they break Rome out of the Roman Empire. It's Pope Stephen II who does this in 756. 763, Naples was still in the Roman Empire. Duke Stephen II, two different guys, same name, makes it easy to remember. 763, Naples breaks out of the Roman Empire and joins the pope in creating this papal state thing. Naples is never part of the papal states, but the idea that it's now going to be a separate thing from the Roman Empire, it breaks away. And the animosity between Rome and Constantinople just keeps growing and growing and growing until 1058. In 1058, they get into a spat that's so bitter and so nasty, they start to excommunicate each other. The patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates the pope. The pope excommunicates the patriarch. Next thing you know, they're interdicting. Interdicting is when you excommunicate whole cities, whole countries, whole regions, whole provinces. They start interdicting each other. And before they're done, Western Europe has completely interdicted Eastern Europe. And Eastern Europe has completely interdicted Western Europe. And the East took the truth, and the West took the universe. And that's why there's a Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, and a Greek Orthodox church. So when Alexios Komnenos goes to Italy in 1095, it's 37 years after they had just done this to each other. So the wounds are raw. They're fresh. And the reason Alexios Komnenos is there is he says, we're not making it. The sultanate of Rome has just taken almost all of Anatolia. We maybe have 10% of it left. We're finished to the east, which means all we have is a little piece of Southeastern Europe. We need your help. And Pope Urban II goes, you know what we should do? We shouldn't just help you a little bit. We should go all out. Let's retake the Holy Land and put it back in the Roman Empire. And Alexios Komnenos goes, yeah, why not? Let's do it. Let's make this happen. And so Pope Urban II comes out of those two talks, meeting with these top officials, including the Roman emperor, and says, I want an army to go to Jerusalem. We're going to conquer all of that and put it back in the Roman Empire. Let's go. 1096, a guy named Peter the Hermit gets up in front of everybody and says, we heard the pope loud and clear. Let's do this. And he puts together what's called the People's Crusade. It's basically just a bunch of peasants, some knights.

It's not the mercenary soldiers. It's not the knight. It's not all knights, right? It's just some peasants. They turn into a mob. And the first thing they do to sanctify the Crusades, this holy religious war, is they attack the Jews living in Germany. And the estimate is they murder about 2,000 Jews, and then they rape like 7,000 more Jews. And then they leave Germany on their way to the Holy Land to... I missed something. I feel like they read a piece of the New Testament that I... Did I? Where does it say that? Before thou goest on the crusade, holiest of holy, do what Jesus would have you do, slaughter Jews in Germany. Did I? And that is the first pogrom. That is the first documented case where Europeans, specifically post-Roman Empire, the Roman Empire hated Jews. Just like it was a hobby for them. They mostly did it in Palestine, right? It was just, ah, the Jews again. They keep throwing rocks at us. That's going to be ironic in a few centuries. So that's the first pogrom. 1096. That army works its way all the way to Constantinople. When it gets to Constantinople, Alexios Komnenos, they've been raiding the whole way because they need to feed themselves. So they're sacking villages. They're tearing into people's food stores. It's a disaster. It's a raiding mob. It shows up at Constantinople. Alexios Komnenos is like, I got to get rid of these guys as fast as I can. He goes, you know what you got to do? You got to cross the Bosporus. Here's my fleet. He puts them on a ship and he sends them across the Bosporus and they set up a camp. They actually attack a town. They capture it. And he's like, I'll send you food. You just stay on your side of the Bosporus. This is going to work out great. In the meantime, he's actually calling the Turks on the phone. Hey, there's some crazy dudes. I just deposited them on your end. Good luck with that. The guy who's now the son of Suleiman I, his name is Khalid Arslan. He decides he's got to get rid of these guys. And they want to take Nicaea. So Nicaea is pronounced Nicaea. I'm going to not say Nicaea again for the rest of the lecture. It drives me nuts. It's like Julius Caesar is Gaius Julius Caesar. Stop saying Julius Caesar. I feel like it could be a salad dressing or something. You know what I mean? It doesn't have to be the name of that guy. Nicaea was the capital for the Sultanate of Rome. So they actually put it almost across from Constantinople. And the reason is because that's their goal. It's Constantinople. They're nowhere near capturing it. They know that. But that's still, you know, it's nice to have a goal, even if it's a far off one. And so they've got Nicaea. It's like poison. And the mob, the peasant mob, the People's Crusade, as it's called, thinks it's going to capture Nicaea. And Clege Arslan basically sets up an ambush for them and slaughters them. And that's the end of the People's Crusade, for the most part. By the way, some of the leadership got away. Because, of course, that's how that usually works out. In any case, the real Crusader army doesn't show up until the next year. The real Crusader army is a mixture of nobles from across France and Germany, primarily, but also Italy, because there's Normans coming. So for our purposes, there's a bunch of Crusaders. There's too many. There's too many names. So I'm just going to simplify it a little bit. The Crusaders you need to know about are Bohemond of Toronto, not Canada, but Italy, and then his nephew, Tancred, and Godfrey de Bouillon, and Baldwin de Bologna. Baldwin and Godfrey are both from northern France. They weren't actually Normans, but they had definitely sided with the Normans. Their father, Eustace II, in fact, was with William the Conqueror in 1066 when the Normans decided to also conquer England. The Normans were very busy people. Oh, let's go to Spain. You know what? I southern it. Anatolia. England. In other words, long after the Vikings started speaking French, they're still tearing up the planet. They're on this permanent, multi-century rampage.

And it wasn't enough for them that they had captured England already twice. They wanted it a third time. They're like, this is good real estate. We want it back. And they got it. And so when Godfrey and Baldwin go on this crusade, they're not actually Normans, but they're part of the Norman sphere. So in a way, the top four of the five most important Crusaders are Normans. The fifth guy is a guy named Raimond. He's Raimond of Toulouse, also known as Raimond Saint-Gilles. He was Raimond the Fourth of Toulouse. And they show up. And Alexius, there's also Hugh de Vermandois. There's a few other guys. But I just want you to know those five. They show up at Constantinople. And they swear an oath of fealty. Well, not Tancred. He refuses. He wants nothing to do with this. And what they promise is that all the land they capture will be handed to Alexius Comnenus, the Roman emperor. And of course, they're lying through their teeth. They have no intention whatsoever of handing anything over. Their goal is to go in there, carve off land, and make their own little personal fiefdoms. They cross over the Bosporus with the Roman navy. It's 1097. Khalid Arslan isn't there to greet them. He's in southern Turkey fighting another Turk. And the reason is that Turk was trying to capture a city from an Armenian, Malatya. And Khalid Arslan was worried if Danishmen captured Malatya, it would put his position, it would weaken his position. So even though he's got this crusader threat on the west, he's so focused on his rivals that he's actually fighting them. He turns around when he realizes the crusaders have landed. He goes as fast as he can. By the time he gets there, Nicaea has already fallen. He convinces other Turks in the area to fight alongside him. They fight the crusaders at Doraleum. And they're defeated. And Khalid Arslan has to withdraw. And they just watch as the crusader army passes. The crusader army then goes through Armenia. So when the Roman Empire lost Anatolia, a piece of the Roman Empire broke away and didn't get captured by the Muslims and remained its own separate thing. It was oftentimes called Lesser Armenia. It was a little Armenian kingdom on what is today the southern coast of Turkey. And so the crusaders arrived there. Tancred was the kind of guy who would look at a situation and he would size it up real quick. He decides to basically conquer it. And he just goes and grabs all the strategic points in Lesser Armenia. And in the process, he's running into Baldwin. Baldwin has the same idea, but he's a little slower. So he keeps arriving after Tancred has done this. And the problem then is Baldwin has the bigger army. So he shows up and Tancred has a problem. Do I fight my fellow crusader, who's basically telling me he's taking my thing from me, or do I walk away? So the first time he walks away, the second time he fights. The crusaders have barely started the crusade and they're already fighting each other. Not many people die for the record. I want to say it was like two guys died and a few dozen are wounded. And then they call off the fight and they negotiate and they make a deal. But still, you can see there's already problems. They get over the mountains, the Tarsus Mountains, and they arrive at Antioch. Antioch is the first prize. So Antioch had only just been captured by the Muslims in 1084. So by the time that the crusaders have arrived, it's 1098. They set up a siege. But Baldwin decides, ah, not interested. And he takes off to the east and he goes to a city called Edessa and he puts Edessa under, he tries to capture Edessa. He doesn't put it under siege. He tries to capture Edessa. And Edessa was ruled by Armenians. And so Baldwin goes to the Armenians and he starts working out a deal with them. The leader of the Armenians in Edessa was a guy named Thoros. And Baldwin talks Thoros into adopting him and then letting him marry Thoros' daughter so that he will become now the heir to Edessa. And Thoros goes, okay. Well, Armenian culture was that when you, presumably, one of the chroniclers says this.

I'm not sure it's actually true. That's one of the problems you always have when you're reading historical accounts. You're always like, mm, did that really happen? According to the chronicler, Armenian culture was when you got adopted, your adoptive father and mother wore a really big gown and then you would take off your top, you'd have pants on, and then you would crawl under the gown, but they're completely naked under, and you hug them. Anyway, so apparently that's what Baldwin did with Thoros and his wife. And then he waited around for a while until a mob grabbed Thoros and his wife and hanged them. And that's the birth of the first crusader state. We now have the county of Edessa. Baldwin is the first crusader lord to rule a chunk of territory. I think it was May 1098. In the meantime, the siege in Antioch is still going on. Bohemond is the guy who wants Antioch for himself, but so does Raimond. So there's now two crusaders both pushing for it, but the problem is they still gotta capture it first. They haven't captured it. The guy who was the ruler of Antioch was a guy named Yarhisian. And Yarhisian starts putting out feelers to see if he can get help to break this, the crusader siege. And there's two guys nearby. There's the guy who's running Damascus, because even though they're part of the Seljuk Empire, the Seljuk Empire is already coming apart at the seams. The Seljuk warlords don't like each other. They don't cooperate. They see each other as rivals. They're constantly backstabbing each other. And the guy in charge of Damascus is a guy named Dukak. And Dukak's brother, Ridwan, is the guy in charge of Aleppo. They hate each other's guts. They see each other as rivals. So Yarhisian sends for help from Dukak. Dukak takes an army, and he has to go past Aleppo, right? And he's coming up past Aleppo. He gets to line of sight of the crusader army. He panics. He turns around, and he heads back to Damascus. So Yarhisian is like, oh, what do I do? I guess I have to talk to Ridwan. But he doesn't want anything to do with Ridwan, because Ridwan has a group of allies that he didn't like. The Hashishans. The Hashishans were Shia who decided they didn't like the direction Islam was going in. Sunnis were systematically winning. The Seljuks were Sunnis. And the Seljuks had replaced the Buyids, who were Shia, and had been defeating the Fatimids, not replace them. The Fatimids were also Shia. And so there is this guy, Hassan al-Sabah, who decides he wants to take a different approach to fight for the Shia cause. And that different approach is he's going to get into political intrigue, spying, and assassinating people. And Hashishan is where we get the word assassin from. Now, whether or not they used Hashish, we don't really know. That could have been the chroniclers trying to make a story up. In any case, Hassan al-Sabah's followers were total fanatics. And Ridwan, the ruler of Aleppo, was totally into them. And they were friends. And they were working together. And so this scares Hashishan. So he doesn't really want anything to do with this. He asks Ridwan to send an army. And Ridwan does pretty much the same thing Dukak does. And nothing comes of it. So Hashishan realizes he's running out of food. He's running out of time. But so are the crusaders. The crusaders are literally starving to death. They've been traveling for months. It's a year now. And they're running out of supplies. And they've been slaughtering their horses along the way. For food purposes, they're down to like 800 horses. And probably half the crusader army is already gone by this point. Some of them died. Some of them got sick. Some of them broke a leg. Some of them just were like, you know what? I don't need this. And they turned around and they headed home. So now, you can see on the inside, Antioch is desperate because he's trying to figure out how he's going to get through this. And the crusaders like Bohemond and Rahamund are trying to figure out how they're going to get in the walls.

And at that point, another guy jumps into the story. And the other guy is the ruler of Mosul, Karbuka. Karbuka, this Yahishan convinces Karbuka to come with an army. But Karbuka has to pass Edessa on the way. And he's looking at Edessa. And he goes, this Baldwin has it. I want it. And so he stops his army. For three weeks, he parks it outside of Edessa. And then he decides he can't take it. And so he abandons the siege. And he heads to Antioch. But by the time he gets to Antioch, his generals are working against him. And so there's all this intrigue going on before he even gets to Antioch. But even though he's still heading to Antioch, it's kind of too late. Because in the meantime, because he took so long, because he added those three weeks, there was a guy named Firuz. Firuz was accused of dealing on the black market even though he knew and was a friend of Yahishan. And so he gets charged a heavy fine. He's so furious about this that he decides to betray his own people. Firuz tells the crusaders, I'm going to let you in to the city. The crusaders are like, why would we believe you? This is probably a trap. He goes, I'm going to give you my son. If it's a trap, kill my son. Crusaders are like, really? OK. Why are you doing this? He goes, I want land, gold, and vengeance. They go, OK. We can give you all three of those. And so in the night, he had access to a window that looked out over the walls. And he just dropped a really long rope down. And the crusaders came up the rope one at a time till there were about 500 guys inside the city. And they began fighting for the gate. Yahishan hears the sound. He panics. He jumps on a horse. And he rides off. He leaves his son and wife and family behind. He just takes off. He doesn't even assess the situation. He just figures, it's over. I'm out of here. He rides for days. He finally collapses from riding. His entourage try to put him back on the horse. They can't get him back on the horse. He's having a depression bout or something. He just lays on the side of the road. A peasant walks by, recognizes who he is, and cuts his head off and takes it to the crusaders and gets a reward. In the meantime, Yahishan's son, Shams al-Daula, son of the state, sun as in the thing in the sky, not child. Shams al-Daula, isn't that a cool name? Who would name their kid that? Anyway, Shams is beautiful, but of the state? Anyway, he's got the citadel, and he's holding on to it. He's like, OK, they've got the city. But he's also watching what the crusaders are doing in the city. They're not kind conquerors. They're not walking through and going, oh, hi, everybody. How's it going? They are murdering everybody. They're just going through the streets, slaughtering the inhabitants of Antioch. They're killing the men. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the poor. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the women. They're killing the babies. They're leaving nobody. And Shams is up there in the citadel going, what? Who are these people? Why are they doing this? Why wouldn't you want the city intact, somebody to tax, somebody to work for you? Why are you slaughtering the city? And there's nothing you can do about it except resist and hold on to the citadel. That's when Karbuka's army shows up. Too late. Shams actually sneaks out of the city to go meet with him to try and coordinate what's going to happen next. How are they going to fight for the city? Because he hasn't given up. Karbuka fires him on the spot. He goes, you're done. You're not going back to the citadel. He then sets up his army to fight. But the princes who are with him fear, Dukak and Ridwan, that if he succeeds, he will then be able to establish authority over Aleppo and Damascus. And so they actually pull off the field and start heading home. And when the rest of his army sees this, they lose heart. The crusaders see what's happening. They see them pulling away. So they come running out of the gate because the crusaders had just found the lance that speared Jesus.

The Romans check to see if he's dead by spearing him. Because if fluid comes out, it means he's drowned in his own fluids. Because that's the goal of crucifixion, is to drown you slowly. And they found the lance that did this. It's not probably, right? Probably what happened was a monk took a lance and buried it and said, I'm pretty sure it's somewhere around here. You guys should dig for it. They dig. They find it. They're like, it's a miracle. And they come charging out of the city towards Kabuka's army. His army's morale has collapsed. His morale has collapsed. They just turn and run away. And the crusaders don't pursue them because they think it must be a trap because they can't figure out why the larger army just ran away for no reason. And then they have their city. There's a brief struggle between Raimond and Bohemond. Bohemond wins. And Bohemond gets to keep Antioch. And then the rest of the crusaders go, we're not here for Antioch. We're here for Jerusalem. Let's keep going. Bohemond goes, I'm good. I got what I wanted. I just wanted one of the richest cities on the planet. Although it's not rich anymore because you just killed its inhabitants. Anyway, I don't understand. They start marching to Jerusalem. The next city they come upon is a town called Ma'ara. When they arrive at Ma'ara, the population fights as hard as they can. So it's soldiers and citizens holding onto the city as hard as they can. But eventually the crusaders get in and they capture the city. When they do, the crusaders murder all 20,000 inhabitants and eat them. So there's multiple sources that say this on both sides. It's always good to have both sides saying it. I know of three sources that are from the crusader side that say they ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. And they describe it in slightly different ways, but it's mostly the same. One of them says that they spit at the adults and the children and just roasted them over a fire. Another one says that they would cut chunks of flesh off of them and then roast the individual pieces over a fire. But it's pretty widespread agreement that the crusaders ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. But there's a lesson in this story that applies to today. So one of the things people will do who want to defend an indefensible position is they'll find something to nitpick. So one of the crusaders says that the people were tortured first, one of the crusader chronicles. But none of the Muslim chronicles say that the people were tortured first. And so what I've seen happen, even on BBC, is somebody will say, well, they may have eaten the people, but they didn't torture them. So first of all, I think if you slaughter 20,000 people, including the children in front of the parents, that's torture. But then second, I kind of don't care if that crusader's chronicles said there was torture and there wasn't or not, because I still think there was a horrible crime committed here. Why are you focusing on that one thing? So no Muslims are saying there was torture. Only one crusader was saying there was torture. Nobody's having an argument with you, dude. There's no, sure, there's no torture. They just killed them and ate them. The reason I'm bringing this up is you see this kind of nitpicking. Like, for example, with the Holocaust, Holocaust deniers, I have seen, focus on the number. So for the record, it wasn't 6 million Jews. It was probably 5.1 to 5.4. 6 million is a slight exaggeration. It's not a big exaggeration, but it's a slight exaggeration. So the Holocaust deniers would focus on the number. Well, it wasn't 6 million. If you just take the 5.1, you took away their ability to do this. And now you can, well, how about the 5.1? And then there's nowhere they can go, because that's the number. The 5.4 is also a number, possibly. But just go with the low. 5.1 is already a horrific, nightmarish, hellish, evil. It doesn't have to be 6. You see what I'm saying? It doesn't have to have been torture. We're good with it just being cannibalism.

So be careful when you're arguing, when you're dealing with people. What is that called? I feel like it's distraction. It's not gaslighting. It's a little different thing. It's like, yeah, but what about? Anyway, the Crusaders then approached Tarabulus, Tripoli. It was one of the wealthiest cities on the planet at the time. So was Antioch, by the way, but not anymore. Tarabulus had a library in it with 100,000 books. It was ruled by a qadi, as opposed to a guy who took the title of maybe king or something. It was ruled by a guy who had the title, basically, judge, which is kind of cool. And the city was rich. It had these big walls around it. The Crusaders set up a siege. There was no point. There was no way they were getting in. So they bypass it. And then they decide, you know what? Let's just keep bypassing. We have Antioch. We have Edessa. We have Ma'ara. Let's just go straight to Jerusalem. Why are we capturing anything else? So they bypass Beirut. They bypass Arsuf, Acre. They just don't deal with any of it. Sur, Fayda, they go straight to Jerusalem. When they get there, they immediately attack it. They don't have any ladders. They don't have any siege equipment. This city has a wall on it. It has a citadel. So the Crusaders just go like a mob, charging up to the thing. And they're like banging on. And the defenders are pouring oil on them, shooting them with arrows, going, they can't get in here. Why are they doing this? And hundreds of them are wounded and killed for no effect. So then the Crusaders set up a siege. The problem is that Jerusalem is brilliantly designed to not be siegeable. So all the sprigs are inside the wall. So the area around it is arid. So the army stuck trying to besiege this thing basically has to run a water line to the Jordan River and by bucket bring the water to the army. That's a tough thing to do. But that's what they're going to do. And they're praying. They're hoping that God will intercede and give them a break. And it may not have been God, but it was the Genovese. The Genovese show up with some English volunteers by ship. And the Genovese brought the material needed to build siege equipment. They build the siege equipment, and they attack the city. So a little bit of, I'm going to bring in another actor, another player. So Egypt had been taken over by the Fatimids. The Fatimids were Shia who had started in North Africa. They took over Egypt. By the way, they found Cairo, 969. Cairo is just barely over 1,000 years old. It's such a baby for the Middle East, right? Middle Easters go, oh, you're 1,000? Oh, you're so young. You're so young. Your whole life is ahead of you. Of course, Cairo is a mega massive city. It's the sixth largest metropolitan area on the planet. There's only three metropolitan areas on the planet that aren't in Asia that are in the top 10. Cairo, Sao Paulo in Brazil, and Mexico City are the three that aren't in Asia. Everything else is Shanghai and Tokyo and Calcutta. You know what I mean? So the Fatimids are doing all right, but something really weird is happening. The Fatimids hated the Seljuks, but the Fatimids liked the Romans. They were allies. So when this whole crusade thing happened, in the mind of the Fatimids, who had just lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks a few years earlier, what's going to happen is the crusaders, who are technically in the service of the Roman Empire, are going to split that land. Syria will go to the Romans. Palestine will go to Egypt. That's what they're thinking is going to happen. So they decide, let's go grab Jerusalem from the Seljuks before the crusaders arrive to do our part in this alliance. They have an explicit alliance with Rome. This isn't like they're speculating. This is the deal that they've made with Alexios Komnenos. And so they send an army. They defeat the Seljuks. They capture Jerusalem. And then they send an envoy to meet with the crusaders. And the crusaders just keep coming. And the Egyptians are like, what are you doing?

No, no, you stay on that side. That's the deal. We're going to split this. And the crusaders just keep coming. And it becomes clear to the Fatimids, they're going to fight. They're allies. So they dig in. And that's when the siege equipment comes and the crusaders break in. And the Egyptian general in command of the defense of Jerusalem, Iftikhar, is looking at this going, how do I fight this now that the crusaders have a sectional wall? And so he retreats his men to the citadel. Once they're in the citadel, there's nothing he can do for the population of Jerusalem. All he can do is he can hold on. It's basically a thorn in their side. He's going to make it so that the crusaders can't control Jerusalem, but they can control parts of Jerusalem. And he won't control any of the merchant part of Jerusalem, the commerce part of Jerusalem. He'll just have a military piece. And eventually, he'll run out of supplies. And their goal is to fight to the death. There's no point. They saw what happened at Ma'ara, and they saw what happened at Antioch. They know who the crusaders are. They're supposed to be allies. They're being backstabbed. They get it. But the crusaders really want the city. And so they start negotiating. And the deal that they come up with, Raymond Saint-Gilles comes up with, is the following, that the Egyptians will leave in groups of five. They'll leave the citadel, and then they'll exit the city five at a time. That way, if the crusaders break their word, turn on them, they'll only kill those five dudes who are in the middle of leaving. And then the guys that are still in the citadel, they can just keep fighting. And anybody who escaped has already escaped. And that's the deal. So the first five go, and then another five, and another five. And you know the last five were like, oh, god, you know they're going to turn on us. But they don't. And the last five get away. And then the crusaders go over to the gate, and they close it. They go over to the Muslim quarter, and they just begin murdering everybody. They're just walking through the city, slaughtering person after person. Tancred, the guy that I talked about, with the strategic mind who kept running into trouble with Baldwin until Baldwin took Edessa, he can't take it. He's like, what are we doing? He runs over to a group of Muslims who were running. And he's like, whoa, whoa, I'm not going to kill you. He hands them his banner. And he says, if crusaders approach you, say you're with Tancred. And show them my banner, and they won't harm you. And they're, of course, grateful. And then he just sort of runs around the city trying to figure out what to loot and how to save people's lives. He hasn't given up the looting. Don't be naive about this. But he's also like, let's not just murder everybody. And he describes in his own memoir, later on coming upon that group of Muslims laying there dead on his bloody banner. The crusaders didn't even care. They're just like, you're with Tancred? A group of Muslims realize there's no surviving this. This is over. So they decide, let's go to the mosque. Let's die praying. And so they barricade themselves inside the mosques. The crusaders eventually smash the doors open. They slaughter everybody inside. They get buckets of water. They wash the blood out. They go to the top of the minaret. They break the crescent moon off, and they stick a cross on top. They say a prayer. Boom. Insta-church. Then they go to the Jewish quarter. Because see, Jerusalem was in four quarters. A Muslim quarter, two Christian quarters, and a Jewish quarter. Why are the crusaders here? So that Christians can own Jerusalem. Because clearly they could be there if they had half the city. Not interesting. So they go to the Jewish quarter. And the Jews know what's coming. It's not rocket science here. So they just start running to synagogues. They figure, you know, let's do like those Muslims did. We'll die in prayer. The crusaders believed that Jews were so horrible, so evil, you couldn't wash out the synagogue afterwards and turn it into a church.

So they just piled wood around the synagogues and burned them to the ground, burning the Jews inside alive. And then they go to the two Christian quarters. And of course, at this point, the Christian population is peeing itself. Because it's just watched half the city get exterminated. And they go, you have the true cross, where is it? And the Christians go, we're not telling you. You're savages. And the crusaders go, OK, we got you. And they start murdering the Christian clergy. They're like, who's a priest? Let's have your priest. And they just start slaughtering the priests. They're like, when we're done, we're going to do the deacons. And then we're going to start working on your families. Eventually, somebody tells them, here's the true cross. Please stop killing us. And they stop massacring the Christians as well. But then they turn to the Christians and go, remember that great schism in 1058? These Catholic priests are your new priests. Get used to it. We're not doing that anymore. Your orthodox ways are out. And they're like, yeah, whatever. And that's how the crusaders captured Jerusalem. Isn't that a heartwarming story? Is that too much sarcasm? At that point, the Egyptians are trying to figure out what to do. They send an army to Ascalon with the hope that they'll eventually be able to come back and fight to capture Jerusalem back. Godfrey is named the new ruler of Jerusalem. He does not take the title king. So he's just the ruler. We'll get to that later. He takes his army. He runs to Ascalon. And the Egyptians were in disarray. They weren't expecting this. And so they weren't set up properly. And he attacks them within their disarray. And a bunch of them fall back. They drop into the fortress. The rest of them escape. And the crusaders get another win. They don't capture Ascalon. But they definitely humiliate the Egyptian army and buy themselves some time. The Egyptians aren't done. Their leader is a guy named Al-Aftal Shahanshah. Now, Shahanshah is not Arabic. It's Persian. But Al-Aftal is. The best leader of leaders is his name. Dude, if you have that as your name, you need to get into politics. That's incredible. That's incredible. Anyway, so Al-Aftal is actually a slave. Isn't that weird? And he's actually Armenian. So the guy running the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt, it has a caliph, a khalifa. It has a Shia khalifa. The guy running it is actually an Armenian slave. There's an actual khalifa who's a Shia Arab. But the guy running it, the wazir, is an Armenian slave named the best leader of leaders. And he's like, we're not doing this. He sends an army. They attack Ramla. Godfrey is dead. Godfrey dies. We don't know why. There's one person says that he was killed in battle. Another person said he got sick. Another person said he was poisoned. Godfrey's dead. He was literally the ruler of Jerusalem for a year. He's replaced by Baldwin, the guy that captured Edessa. He comes down. It's his brother. So the chronicler said that when Baldwin received the news, he was very happy, but also a little sad that his brother had died. And he comes down, and he's crowned king. And that's the moment in the year 1100 that the kingdom of Jerusalem is officially going, because there's now a king. But Godfrey was at 1099 when they captured Jerusalem. He meets Al-Afdal at Ramla in 1101. And he defeats the Egyptian army. The Egyptian army withdraws. They come back the next year, because Al-Afdal is not going to give up easily. They attack Ramla. And this time, they beat the crusaders. The crusaders fall to Jaffa. And in the second battle at Jaffa, the crusaders win again. The Egyptians withdraw. They come back in 1105 to do it again. They attack Ramla. And they're defeated a third time. And the Egyptians give it a rest. They're like, OK, we're exhausted losing. In the meantime, something really critical happens for the purposes of how the crusades are going to unfold. And it's the Battle of Haran. So Haran used to be called Karhaye.

Karhaye is where the Romans fought the Persians for the first time in 53 BC. And the Romans were, I mean, just summarily defeated. It was a catastrophe. 26,000 Romans against 8,000 Persians. And the Persians maybe lost like 100, 150. And the Romans lost like 13,000 dead, 10,000 captured. So the crusaders are going to do another Karhaye, only the city's been renamed Haran. And the Muslim army comes out to meet it at Haran. It's southeast of Edessa. And the crusaders are defeated. They are beaten in the field. And in fact, one of the crusaders is captured. His name is Baldwin. But it's a different Baldwin. It's not the king of Jerusalem. It's his cousin. I think it's his cousin. And his cousin's name was Baldwin Borsk. That's what's in my, Borsk, I think is what it was. And he's become the count of Edessa when Baldwin becomes the king of Jerusalem. And so he goes into captivity. And he's stuck in captivity for four years. And while he's in captivity, Bohemond himself also gets captured. And he ends up in captivity. So there's two crusaders that are now out of the picture because they've been captured. And then Raimon decides he wants Terabolus. So Raimon was probably supposed to become the king. But for whatever reason, he decided he didn't want to be the king of Jerusalem. He wanted to be the king of Terabolus. So what he did was he set up a siege for Terabolus after they captured Jerusalem in 1102. And he's built a fortress north of Terabolus. And he's fighting day after day. The defenders of Tripoli come out late in 1104. They set his fortress on fire. Raimon himself is severely injured in the fire. He survives it but dies like three or four months later from his wounds. So the crusaders have now lost basically three, four of their top crusaders. Godfrey is dead. Raimon is dead. Bohemond is in captivity. Baldwin, spoiler alert, who will become Baldwin II, who will become the second king of Jerusalem, is in captivity. So that's a weird story, obviously. And so they're in trouble. By this point, most of the crusaders have actually gone home. In other words, if the Muslims had just attacked in an organized fashion at that moment, there was nothing to stop them from just taking it all back. But the Muslims are in such disarray. And each of these Turkish warlords, these Seljuk warlords, hates each other's guts so much they just won't cooperate together. It gets so weird that at some point, 1108, there's going to be a battle. Baldwin gets released. And Baldwin is going to make a deal with the ruler of Mosul. And he's going to field an army. So it's going to be a crusader army next to a Seljuk army. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight against each other. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight Tancred. Tancred ended up becoming the regent of Edessa while Baldwin was in prison. Tancred doesn't want to give it up. He doesn't want Baldwin to come back. Tancred goes and he gets Ridwan, the guy from Aleppo. So there's a Tancred. The crusader has a Muslim ally. And they're next to each other in the field. And they're going to fight a battle against a Muslim crusader army. And by the way, they defeat Jawali and Baldwin. They have to escape. And Tancred basically keeps Edessa as a result. He's eventually talked into participating in the siege of Tarabulus. They're going to actually try and take it once and for all. And when he does that, he reconciles with Baldwin. But here we are. It's 1108. The crusaders just captured Jerusalem nine years earlier. And there's a battle where there's Muslims and crusaders on both sides fighting each other. Like, it's already gone sideways in every way you can imagine. And that's the first part of the Crusades. Having said that, there's so much more to this story, which is what I warned you from the beginning. Like, I am not going to get through the Crusades. I literally got you to 1108. By the way, my goal was 1125. But I think I'm basically out of time. So I'm surrendering and accepting I'm not going to get to my goal.

But to put things in perspective, the second crusade is 1145. The kingdom of Jerusalem is going to go down in a ball of flames. In case you didn't know that, I hope I didn't spoil this for you. But in 1187, after the Battle of Hattin. So then the third crusade is after that. And then there's a fourth crusade in 1202. And so in other words, the Crusades are just going to keep going for a while. And they actually don't end by most people's. The usual number we use is 1291. So it's 195 years. I've just covered nine of it. Well, 12 if you include the, well, even more. 13 if you include the peasant crusade. By the way, there's supposedly a children crusade in this. It's a lot of fun. The Crusades were great. I'm going to tell you the children crusade. I'm going to let you go. It happens later. So this is out of time sequence. But it's just too fun since I mentioned it. A group of children think if they go and just show up in Jerusalem, the Muslims will give it back. Because this is after the Battle of Hattin. So they don't, children obviously walking from France to Palestine is a little tricky. So what they do is they walk to Venice. And they show up. And they ask, will you, the Venetian Navy, just take us? And the Venetians go, yeah, of course. It would be our sacred duty to take you. And the children are never heard from again. They were sold into slavery. The Venetians just put them on the ships, took them to slave markets, and just. Isn't that just capitalism? I'm pretty sure that's just capitalism. All right. Thank you for your time. And if you want to come see my show and tell, I'll stick around to let you do that. And actually, you know what? I'll field a question. And then I'll let you go. How about that? I always forget to do that. I actually don't always. No? No questions? OK, good. We're done.

I have some stuff I want to do before I jump in, and I also want to talk about what I'm going to do when I jump in so that it's not a complete surprise. So one of the things I want to do, I have a lot of trouble with, which is it's self-promotion. So I'm going to pass these around, these are just bookmarks. It's advertising my novel, and I brought a copy of my novel. So I have a novel, and it's The Blood Throne of Caria, and the reason I'm pushing it, and it makes me feel dirty doing this, so I'm probably just off a little bit, is because I'm ramping up to try and put out another novel, and if I can get a little bump in sales before that happens, it helps me. So if you like that kind of stuff, get my novel. That kind of stuff is historical fiction. I'm particularly obsessed with basically everything from Iran to Italy. That's like my zone where I obsess about. This is set in the 6th century, 5th century, 5th century B.C. in the southwest corner of Turkey. And it's about a real person, so it's historical fiction, but she doesn't have, her name is Artemisia, she doesn't have a lot of, how should we say this, there's a lot of attacks done on her by historians, and so my goal in writing this novel was to figure out what was true and what was a lie, and then correct the lie. But I can't claim it's the truth because it's speculation on my part, so hence historical fiction. Somebody's going to ask at some point what they should read. This is a fun way to start, it's The Crusades Through Arab Eyes, wouldn't that be a novel idea, by Amin Malouf. It's an old book, it's 1985 if I remember correctly, but there, now I've done that part. I also want to dedicate this talk to a group of people, so it's a small list, but I just want to do this. Omar, Saeed, Iman, Iman, Iman, and then Hadi, I'm probably forgetting somebody else I intended. You know what, I'm going to throw Jayden into the mix, he'll be like, oh my god, I can't believe you threw my name in there. I actually have a, I was just gifted a piece of rock from Palestine from the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and so I'm probably going to hold on to it the entire talk because, well, my talk is going to take place in Palestine mostly, so this is kind of a strange thing to have right now. Also, let's see, what did I do with it, I probably already lost it. I brought show and tell, but it won't work because the camera is too small and you're sitting too far away. I actually brought coins from the time period, so I will, after the talk, you can come up and look at it, and then what I'll do is we'll put, for the people who are watching this on video, I'll just put pictures up on it, but just to give you an idea of what I have, this is a coin from William II. It's after the period I'm talking about today because I'm not going to get to him. William II was the king of Sicily. The year in my head is 1153, but who knows. Anyway, the reason I brought it was because I am going to talk about the Normans, and I'm going to talk about Sicily a little bit for background purposes, and I kind of wanted to stick this in your head a little bit. On one side, the coin is written in Latin. On the other side, it's written in Arabic because the Normans took Sicily from the Arabs, and so they just made it so that they were a bilingual society. This, let me see, hold on, I'll do this one here. This coin is going to matter because this is Romanus IV, the Roman emperor. I'm going to talk about him in a little bit of detail, just briefly, because he's going to set things in motion that make the rest of the story possible, and then when you look at the coin, you'll see that the quality of the coin dramatically falls when you get to Alexios Komnenos. Alexios Komnenos becomes the Roman emperor just like 11 years later, and the quality of the coin is terrible compared to this one, so it makes you realize how far into decline the Romans had fallen. One of the things I'm going to do is I'm going to do a little bit of background, and in the process of doing the background talk, I'm going to bring up the birth of the Arab Empire.

We don't know what year this coin was minted because it doesn't have a year on it. It's actually a counterfeit coin. The Arabs, when they made their empire, needed coins, and they went and stole a Roman mint, and they began minting coins, Roman coins, so it has Latin letters on the back. It has three Roman emperors, well, an emperor and his two sons on the front. They're holding in one hand a cross, and in the other hand a globus cruciger with a cross sticking out of it, so there's literally six crosses on this coin, and this is the Arab Empire, one of the Arab Empire's first ever coins. It was minted during the Rashadin period. We don't know a date, so I can't tell you who, but most likely it would have been Uthman ibn Affan or the Khalifa Ali ibn Abi Talib. It's probably not one of the earlier two, and then this coin is Muawiyah I. He did the same thing. It's a Roman emperor with two crosses in his hand, and on the back, Latin letters, and one of the reasons why I wanted to sink that into your heads is to also show how the boundary between things is really blurry, right? We're a society of people who want to put everything into categories, including ourselves. We can't wait to label ourselves, and we keep breaking it down further and further, and the reality is these categories are all imaginary and made up. Nobody is that easy to categorize, you know what I mean, let alone whole societies, especially societies where everything is blurred together. I probably have said Arabic words, for example, that are English in this. I wasn't paying attention, but you know, at one point I might say the word nadir or zenith or zero, and then by contrast, Arabic is filled with Latin words. For example, the word faloos, the word for money, comes from pholos. It literally was, one of those coins was a pholos that I was holding up, and so the word is actually Latin. It's not Arabic. It's just the Arabs used the Latin word. Cres, the word for cherries, comes from crassinus, which is the Latin word for cherry, and it can go on and on because everything is stuck together. All right, so as Eric Deggans would say, I'm going to do a bunch of table setting. Eric Deggans is a TV critic that I listen to on NPR, and he recently complained about too much table setting, but I don't know how to not do table setting, and the reason I have to do the table setting is if I just jump into the Crusades and start talking about it, it'll be entertaining because there's a lot of violence. Like, if you enjoy People Massacred, and I know you do because I watch the same movies you do, then this is a great story because it is gory, but it's kind of helpful to know why it happened, and how did we even get into the situation where it was possible. So I can't skip that. Having said that, I have no intention and no belief that I can, even if I wanted to, cover the entire Crusades. So in other words, this is part one. You're just setting this up now. I will try to do the entire Crusades, but I'm betting I'm going to have to do four parts. One of the reasons I don't know is, some of you have figured this out about me, I don't write my lectures out, so I actually don't know what I'm going to say until it starts happening, and so as a result, I don't know how the timing of this is going to land, so it'll be fun. I'm exploring this with you, and we'll see where it goes. It'll probably be a train wreck, and people will hate it, but it'll be fun for me anyway, and that's the important thing. All right, so, to do this, I need to introduce some actors. The first actor I want to introduce is probably the most important actor in the story, and it's the Arabs. And the reason they're the most important, obviously, is because the Crusaders are going to invade the Arab world to fulfill their goal of making a kingdom of Jerusalem. So, the Arabs created an empire that most people don't refer to, don't talk about, that's basically been deleted from history. It's the Arab empire, although I've frequently heard it referred to as the Muslim empire.

The reason you need to not do that and call it the Arab empire is the Arab empire was created by Arabs, like the Roman empire was created by Romans. We don't call it the pagan empire, and when it becomes Christian, we don't call it the Christian empire, right? When it becomes Japanese, we don't call them the Shinto Buddhist empire, you know what I mean? When Alexander the Great made his empire, we don't call it the pagan empire. So, why would we do this in this one particular case? And what I'm going to pose to you is the reason we usually don't even name it, and if we do, we sometimes call it the Muslim empire, is because of anti-Arab hate. We have that running through the core of our society, the core of our civilization, and one of the reasons is because of the events that led to the Crusades and the Crusades themselves. In other words, by doing anti-Arab hate, you're perpetuating this old wound. It's time to let it go. Although, by the time we're done tonight, you'll be like, oh my gosh, what's that about? So, it'll be good. The Arabs began making their empire, and by empire, I mean it in the true sense of the word empire. To be clear, a state that rules multiple countries and nations. That's all you need to be to be an empire. Having said that, you could claim that in the United Kingdom today, what's left of the great empire is still an empire, because Great Britain is Wales, England, and Scotland. That's three countries. And then, throw in Northern Ireland, Gibraltar, Bermuda, and the Falkland Islands and Malvinas, and you end up with multiple countries, right? Or at least pieces of multiple countries. So, they began making their empire in 633, when the first Khalifa, Abu Bakr, launches his armies into the Persian and Roman Empires simultaneously, in what should have been a completely insane, impossible, can't-be-done event. And it's not only done, but by 711, the Arab Empire became the largest empire on the planet to that date. There have been larger empires since, but there had never been a larger empire before this. It stretched, by 711, from Spain to Pakistan. It went all the way into Central Asia. So, if you can conjure a map of the Roman Empire, it owned about 60% of the Roman Empire. Conjure a map of the Persian Empire, it owned 100% of the Persian Empire. And it went into Central Asia, and it went into India. Fine? For those of you, because I just said Pakistan, for those of you who don't know, the British cruelly and sadistically cut Pakistan out of India. Pakistan is India. It's just, you know how the Brits are. It's divide and conquer, wreck, destroy, ruin. India is named after the Indus River, which is 100% in Pakistan. It's just cruel. You know what I mean? Anyway, so, this Arab Empire, by the way, when it was born, it had a tiny Muslim population. But by 711, it had a few more Muslims. It was maybe 5-10% of the population was Muslim. The empire itself was majority Christian, 60% Christian. In fact, probably somewhere around 60% of the world's entire Christian population was in the Arab Empire. Isn't that hard to comprehend? The majority of the world's Christians lived in the Arab Empire, an empire that was majority Christian. In 711. So, the empire has been around that, right? From 633 to 711, it's already been around for a few decades. It's not like it was just born. One of the reasons why Muslims are such a small percentage of the population is they didn't convert by the sword. There was no compulsion to become Muslim. At first, what the Muslim conquerors did was they said, if you're Christian or Jewish, you worship the book. Therefore, you have a pathway to heaven. So, you have to be treated like a full human. But then, as they kept conquering, they kept running into other religions. And they just kept extending it. So, the Zoroastrians, okay, yeah, why not? And, right, centuries later, by the time they're in India proper, they're like, yeah, Hindus too, it's all good. We're going to make this work. Right?

That was what kept happening. By the way, the Arab Empire in 711 was probably about five, ten percent Buddhist, just to mess with you. Afghanistan had a giant Buddhist population. So, it seems counterintuitive, but there it is. That empire gets into a conversation with itself. And the conversation it has with itself stems from a problem that they had. The Arabs had never ruled themselves, let alone ruled an empire, right? Until this moment. 633, the year they launched the empire, is the year the Arabs, for the first time in history, ruled the entire Arabian Peninsula. So, they don't even catch their breath. They conquer the Arabian Peninsula, put it under a single state, and then they just go, they just keep going. Next thing you know, they've conquered the Persian Empire, and they've conquered the majority of the Roman Empire, and they're in France, trying to conquer France. What was the Battle of Tours? 732 is in my head, I hope that's not wrong. So, this empire has a problem. Arabs don't know how to run an empire. They've never run an empire before. Normally, conquerors are arrogant, and they're cruel, and they're sadistic. Like, take the Romans. So, I'm part Italian. So, for those of you that like being mean to Italians, a little bit, but it's okay. Gaius Julius Caesar, the guy you incorrectly called Julius Caesar, when he conquered Gaul, there were three million people living in Gaul. When he left, there was one million people living in Gaul. He murdered one million, he enslaved one million, and then he looked at the remaining million and went, welcome to the Republic. By the way, we'd like for you to worship our gods. Let's have your taxes now. Oh, and we're going to steal your technology. That's what conquerors often did, right? The Arabs, on the other hand, were humble about this, and they told the Romans and the Persians they had conquered, we don't know what we're doing, we don't know how to do this. We want to just leave you where you are. You're a bureaucrat, you're running this province, don't stop, and then we'll watch you. Maybe we'll figure it out, but in a few generations, hopefully we'll have this sorted out. In the meantime, I'm going to counterfeit this money over here. It's got crosses on it, but that's okay. I'm okay with that. I like Jesus. And that was kind of their conversation. So, the reason that matters is Muawiyah, I showed you the coin. Muawiyah I moves the capital after a civil war that lasts five years, that ends in 661. He moves the capital to Damascus from Medina. When he puts the capital in Damascus, he puts it in a former Roman city. And that matters, because it meant that the bureaucrats around Muawiyah are shaping the policies he's creating, and it orients the Arabs in the Arab empire west. It orients them towards the Romans. And in fact, he's going to lay siege to Constantinople. He won't capture it. But then a subsequent Arab the next century is going to do it again, and they'll fail a second time. Had they captured Constantinople on either of those two, they would have taken out the Romans too, because they had already conquered the Persians. Yazdegerd III was the last Persian emperor. He's gone. Persians are done. But the Romans are still hanging on. For the record, what saved the Romans was the emperor put out a contest. He said, anybody who can invent something that can save us, I will give you a sum of money. A Syrian refugee, isn't that cool? Isn't that weird, a refugee? I thought we were supposed to put them in cages. Anyway, a Syrian refugee invented a flamethrower. So what happened was the Roman Navy had a chain blocking the vulnerable north end of Constantinople. They had a chain that went across, so the Arab Navy couldn't get through it. And the Roman Navy was hiding behind the chain, this big chain. And the Romans pulled up the chain, and the Roman Navy started coming out. The Arabs are like, why are they coming? We'll just sink them. This is suicide. And the Romans came right up on them.

And the Arabs had no idea they had flamethrowers. And they just opened up and set the Arab fleet on fire. And that's how they saved Constantinople. Anyway, that's why you should never turn away Syrian refugees. That is the rule on that one. Or is the rule you should make them. Sorry, I went to a dark place. All right, so in 750, there's a coup d'etat. The Abbasids overthrow the Umayyads. And they move the capital to a brand new city that they've just built on a village. The village is called Baghdad. It's a Persian village. And they move the capital to this city. They rename it Medina Tassalam, the City of Peace. And they build this amazing fortress system. It's a two-layer fortress system. It's incredible. The city should be impossible to capture. And science and commerce and philosophy pour into the city. Art pours into the city. And the city grows really fast and becomes a major city really quickly. But it's in Iraq, which was Persian, not necessarily ethnically, by the way. There was a huge Arab population in Syria during Roman period and a huge Arab population in Iraq already. What I mean is it was the Persian Empire. But there were also a lot of Persians as well because they were intermingled. Because you've got to remember, this is a pre-nationalistic society. It's before people went, oh, my DNA is better than DNA by virtue of my race or by virtue of my nation. Back then it was, I was born in this city and that makes me better than you. It was city discrimination, which is fun. We have that a little bit. Like whenever a Houstonian walks up to you, you know he's from. Anyway, so this means that the conversation changes. Because now it's got a Persian orientation because the Abbasids are surrounded by Persian bureaucrats. And those Persian bureaucrats have two agendas. One, to shift the attention of the Arab Empire east. And two, to destroy it. That is their goal. They are going to break this thing. The reason is, is because most of the countries that the Arabs conquered adapted and began to speak Arabic. Or at least there was a large population slowly starting to speak Arabic. Like Arabic probably didn't become the major language in Egypt until about 900 AD. But there was already a population of people speaking Arabic for commercial purposes and for political purposes by this point. The Persians weren't learning Arabic. They were holding onto their identity and their language. They had converted to Islam, but they weren't going to convert to being Arab. So right, ethnically Egyptians aren't actually Arab. But culturally and linguistically, they're 100% Arab. I keep running into conversations with people like, well, Egyptians aren't real Arabs. Oh, do they still speak ancient Egyptian? I miss that. I mean, they do. If you go to a Coptic church and listen to the liturgy, they do it in Coptic. Coptic is ancient Egyptian. Ancient Egyptian is as alive in Egypt as Latin is in Italy. You can hear it. It's not dead dead. It's just mostly dead. Right? And so what it means to be Arab is really more of a linguistic thing than it is an ethnic thing. It's not a DNA thing. It's do you speak Arabic? Well, the Persians rejected that. They refused. They resisted. And so little by little, they start to pick at the Arab empire from within, because they're the bureaucrats running it now. And pieces of the Arab empire start to come off. If I remember correctly, the first piece comes off, well, the first piece comes off in 756. Spain. One of the Umayyads escaped the Abbasids. They massacred the Umayyads. They tried to kill all of them so there would be no rivals out there causing them problems. Well, one of them got away. He snuck through Egypt. He went across North Africa. He went to Spain. And in 756, six years after the Abbasid revolt, he pulls Spain out of the empire. And so the empire is already starting to come apart in 756. I think 727 is the next time a major piece comes out. And that's over in Persia. And little by little, the Arab empire starts to disintegrate.

Eventually, it will lose all of North Africa and Persia. And as it's shrinking, the khalifa, the system where you had a person who was a religious and a political authority, is starting to become symbolic. And they're being replaced by wazirs. They're being placed by ministers. And so there's actually now a secular leader who's running the show. And the khalifa is becoming a symbolic leader who's mostly just confined to a palace in Baghdad and has no meaningful role other than to walk around the garden looking pretty. And by the time that happens, it also means that the person who has the best position symbolically to unify people has no political power, which is bad if you're trying to hold things together. I can't give you an exact date when the Arab empire stops functioning. But it's pretty finished by 900. I've seen the year 833 used as well. I think you can have an argument about when that's happened. By the time the Buyids are running Baghdad, it's over. There's no two ways about it. The Buyids were Persians who had broken out Iraq and a huge chunk of Iran and were ruling it on their own. And of course, the reason that matters now is if there is going to be a European invasion down the road, there isn't an empire to stop it. Well, there will be, because I'm going to have to introduce another actor, and it's the Seljuks. In 1037, a group of Turkish warriors begin to conquer the Middle East. And they create an empire to replace the Arab empire. And that empire is the Seljuk empire. So for the record, Turks are from Central Asia. They are in the same cultural linguistic group as Mongolians, Koreans, and the Japanese. I'm going to let you sit on that one for a moment. I take that in. Japanese, Koreans, Mongolians, and Turks are the same cultural linguistic group. Do this as an exercise. Find a Turk and stand up next to a Korean and have the Koreans start speaking Korean and have the Turks start speaking Turkish. It is crazy cool. It is very, very super cool. You should totally do this experiment. You can. They exist here in Austin. Just start looking for them. The Turks are starting to move into the Middle East for multiple reasons, one of them being they're serving as mercenaries. Another one is they're just looking for land to inhabit. It's a migration. There are immigrants coming in. And by 1037, they're politically in a position where they start conquering. And they end up conquering a huge chunk of the Asian part that the Arab empire had. I'm making this number up because I never measured it. But they probably ended up with about 30% of the Arab empire, maybe a little bit more. Maybe a third of the Arab empire. Let me introduce another actor, the Roman Empire. So I've said this before in lectures. So people who have seen my previous lectures will probably be annoyed with me because I'm just repeating myself. But I have to a little bit because I'm going to assume that you haven't. And that way it makes sense. When I was a kid, when I was an adult, I was taught that the Roman Empire fell on September 4, 476 AD. This is one of my big pet peeves about the way we teach history. The Roman Empire did not fall on September 4, 476 AD. That's just a lie. There's nothing even remotely truthful about it. What happened on September 4 is Romulus Augustus, the Western Roman emperor, took off his purple robes, stuck it in a box with a note attached to the box that said, we don't need two emperors anymore. We just need one emperor. And he sent it to Emperor Zeno. Emperor Romulus Augustus was in Ravenna, Italy. That was the capital of the Western Roman Empire at that time. They had long since abandoned Rome. The city of Rome existed. It was largely empty, though. It had 1 and 1 half million people at its height. And at that point, there were 40,000 people. Can you imagine walking through the streets of a city that at one point had 1 and 1 half million people and there's only 40,000 people there? Talk about ghost town. What was that like?

And of course, most of those houses and buildings have collapsed, and they're in ruins. But still, that must have just been a trip. We were great ones. What happened to us? This is terrible. And then you look at the coins, and they were striking at the time. And you're like, dude, what happened to your artists? They all died, too? Find some artists. So what happened was the Roman Empire fell on May 29, 1453. So when you were a kid, probably this happened. It happened to me. People would go, we don't know why the Roman Empire fell. Maybe it was the gladiators. They stopped doing the gladiating like centuries earlier. So probably not. Maybe it was the orgies and the eating festivals. They also stopped doing some of that, too. I mean, they still had a little bit of that going. But not as much as they did during the Republic. That was the height of that. You know what I mean? That was the good old days. So that's probably not it. Lead pipes. If lead pipes was a problem, we're in trouble. I don't know if you know this, but we have lead pipes in the United States. All the urban centers have lead pipes, as Flint found out. So probably not the lead pipes, either. For the record, what happens is hard water calcifies the inside of the lead pipes, and then the lead is no longer a problem because there's basically a salt layer inside the pipe protecting you from the lead. But then your city council decides they don't have enough money. Why? Because we went through a tax-cutting frenzy because somebody went, taxes are evil. They pay for things like water. What do you mean taxes are evil? Roads. Where do you think roads come from? Schools. Schools are also taxes. Hospitals, scientific research, police departments, fire departments. It's not the Libertarian Ferry that delivers that stuff. That's taxes. Unless you're lucky and you had a bunch of oil, like Texas does. Anyway, but it's OK. We keep our electric grid functioning just as well as Egypt does. So that's amazing. It's fun living in a third world country again. You know what I mean? It's very familiar. I go to Mexico in the summer so I have electricity. Also, by the way, it's cooler. Push that through your brain. I still can't get over that. I'm very confused about that. So I've derailed myself. Why did I go down that path? So here's what happened. I was taught we don't know why the Romans collapsed. But we do know why the Romans collapsed. And the reason we know why the Romans collapsed is because I can actually tell you the exact day the Romans collapsed. I don't know what it's telling me. Actually, it's telling me you need to go. The Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453. The reason why the Romans collapsed on May 20, you thought I was kidding, the reason why the Romans collapsed on May 29, 1453, and I can tell you exactly why, is because an Ottoman army captured the last Roman capital, Constantinople. Constantinople was the last piece of Roman real estate. In other words, there's no mystery why the Romans fell apart, the Roman Empire fell apart. It fell apart because it was conquered. And we know the exact moment it was conquered. In other words, there's no reason to have doubt about the date that the Roman Empire fell. Here's what happened. There was a guy named Hieronymus Wulf. About a hundred years after the Roman Empire fell, and I want to say a hundred years, but that's probably wrong, somewhere around 1550, right? The Roman Empire fell 1453. He decided he was going to rewrite history on purpose and tell a really big lie on purpose. He had two goals. One, he wanted to divorce the Roman Empire from its ignominious defeat at the hands of the Muslims. The Roman Empire was a Christian empire. He was a Christian. He was a German. And he hated the idea that Muslims had conquered the Roman Empire, that the Roman Empire had been defeated by Ottoman Turks. And so he decided he was going to move the date of the conquest of the Roman Empire to a hundred years earlier, lie to everybody, and people would accept the lie because it would divorce the end of the Roman Empire from the Muslims.

And then the second goal was, in 476, Odo Vakur, the German, declared himself the king of Italy. Now, to be clear, he left Italy in the Roman Empire. He didn't separate Italy from the Roman Empire. So Italy just became, instead of a set of provinces, it became one kingdom with Odo Vakur, the ruler, who sent taxes to Emperor Zeno and flew a Roman flag. It's weird, but it also means Italy is still in the Roman Empire. But because Odo Vakur was a German, then Hieronymus Wolf could say, the Germans took out the Roman Empire. But it's not true. It's a lie. It's a bald-faced lie. So by the time we get to the Crusades, there's a Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire is playing a major role. And the reason the Roman Empire is playing a major role is it's been in decline for a long time. When I say the Roman Empire fell in 1453, you have to remember that's after 2,200 years. The Romans aren't quite as long as the Egyptians in terms of the length of their history, right? When the Romans conquered Egypt in 31 BC, Egypt was a 4,500-year-old civilization, right? It's not quite on that scale, but it's really close. It's half that scale. And Rome had been in decline since the 200s. In other words, Rome had been on its way out for 13 centuries. So for more than half of the length of time that Rome had been around, it was struggling to survive. That's what you call tenacity, resilience. That's incredible. Who survives barely making it for that long? At one point, they actually do get conquered. And they manage to put themselves back together and reconstitute themselves and just keep going. They break up on multiple occasions. Zenobia is my favorite. There was a woman who led a rebellion in Syria, and she captured Syria, Turkey, Palestine, and Egypt, and she made her own little empire. They were too sexist to let a woman rule, so she made her six-year-old son the actual emperor. But she ruled, and his name was Wabalathus. Wabalathus. Isn't that a cool name? Anyway, and by the way, Palmyra was her capital. So sort of a strange twist, right? She was like in the middle of Syria, made her capital there. Don't worry, the Romans killed her. Something like that's not going to be allowed. And they put the empire back together, and then it fell apart. It was like an accordion. The Arabs come, tear them up. The Germans tear them up. It's a mess. The Huns tear them up. The Bulgarians tear them up. It's just wave after wave until they finally just go down once and for all in 1453. But by the time the story of the Crusades is happening, the Romans are desperately trying to hold on to what is today Turkey. I'm going to use Anatolia just because I think it makes it a little bit less confusing, at least in my brain. Anatolia was the name at the time. Turkey is the name today because it's the Turks' habit, right? They've named it after themselves. Another actor I want to introduce might sound strange. It's the Vikings. I'm going to tell you something really strange. The Vikings are one of the reasons why the Crusades happened. Isn't that weird? You're like, wait, why? Work with me here on this one because it's kind of strange. So the Vikings were Germans. They were the Germans who settled Scandinavia. Scandinavia was kind of like the worst piece of real estate in Europe at the time. Today, obviously, it's like heaven. But back then, it was the garbage piece that nobody wanted to go to. In other words, the people who became the Vikings, they never called themselves Viking. Viking is a term we've retroactively put on top of them, like the term Byzantine that Hieronymus Wolf came up with for the Roman Empire's last 1,000 years, 977 years for those of you who want it to be more precise. There's no such thing as a Byzantine Empire. The Vikings, I'm going to use the term Viking anyway, though. The Vikings got stuck with this piece of real estate where you really couldn't grow a crop. So pretty much all you could do was raise cattle and go fishing. And at some point, their population had reached a threshold.

They had sort of reached the carrying capacity of cheese rolls and dried fish. And when that happened, they had no choice but to start looking for alternatives. And they took two approaches, by the way. One approach the Vikings did was they set out to start trading. They thought, you know what? We can fix our problem if we can do trade, because we'll have the money to buy the food that we need. And the Eastern Vikings, the Swedes, got so into this, they actually started trying to figure out where they could go to. And they started reading their sagas. This is the 8th century. Not reading their sagas. They were oral histories. They were listening to their sagas. And the sagas told the Vikings that the place the Germans were from was Iran. By the way, Kermani-Iran, which is where we get the word German, because ga and ka, when languages change over time, are interchangeable. So Kerman, German. We say German because we pronounce it like a French person would. But a German says German, right? So if you're saying the study of Germanic studies, it's Germanismus, because they don't say it the way a French person would. So the sagas tell the Vikings you're originally from Persia. So the Swedes go, wow, that's an idea. Let's go. Let's see what we can find. And so what they would do is they would go to what is today Latvia. They would take their long ships up the Dvina River. They'd go as far inland as you could get, pretty close to the city of Rzhev. They would pull their ships out of the water, fully loaded, because they have to carry their supplies. They can't leave the supplies behind. So they would carry these fully loaded ships over land until they got to the Volga River. I mean, that's a pretty manly, you know what I mean? Like, they've got their armor and their weapons. And they're hauling these. I want to go backwards in time just to see this. You know there was a lot of grunting. And then they put the ship in the Volga River. And they sailed the Volga River all the way to the Caspian Sea. And they went down the Caspian Sea to the Persian coast. And they're like, hi. And the Arabs had just conquered Persia a couple of centuries earlier. And they're walking around Persia going, what is all this? You have modern agriculture and modern medicine. And you're doing philosophy. And you've invented zero. And you're doing algebra. And the Vikings are like, we don't even have a written language. We shouldn't have left. We could have had this. And they began trading. Now, to supplement their trading on that long trade route, they would also raid. And they would attack the Slavic populations along the way. And they would take some for slaves. And then they would sell them into the slave markets, make a little bit of extra koi. So maybe that. Full disclosure, I'm a quarter Swedish. So if there's a little bit too much admiration on my part, it's just ugly nationalism. The Western Vikings started raiding England. And then they started expanding where they raided. And before you knew it, they were just raiding all of northern and Western Europe. And in the process, they start to get some amazing victories. So you know, London Bridge is falling down, falling down. That's because it did. That's because my ancestors took out London Bridge. That song is based on a real event. Isn't that cool? I think it is. And so the Vikings actually end up conquering places like England. They get multiple kings of England. Cnut the Great, of course, the most famous. But there's also Svein Forkbeard. Isn't that a cool name? Svein Forkbeard. And they end up ruling this empire that stretches across Scandinavia and England. And they were doing all right for themselves. And they got their eyes on Paris. And they thought, you know what? Let's go take France. I don't know why not. We've got Latvia and Estonia and Finland and Ukraine, right? Because the Vikings, eventually the Ukrainian nobles couldn't figure out how to rule their lands. So they started hiring Viking mercenaries.

The group of Viking mercenaries they hired were the Rus, R-U-S. And the Rus eventually created Kievan Rus because they realized they were the only armed guys. And they didn't know why they were taking orders from anybody. And they just took over. And that's how Russia was founded. Isn't that crazy? Anyway, they almost got Paris. Long story short, they were on the island. They were battering down doors. They were scaling the walls. They almost got Paris. It was so close. And so after they failed to get Paris, the French came out. And they went, OK, that was too close. You almost got us. If you get a second shot, we don't think we're making it. So what do we do? We're not surrendering, surrendering. We're not giving you Paris. We're going to make you fight for it if you try to get it again. But we really don't want you to try again. We're going to meet you somewhere. And they make a deal with a guy named Rollo. And the deal is Northern France. They give Rollo Northern France. Now the Vikings, I told you, weren't called Vikings. They were called the Northmen, or depending on your language, Norsemen, or Nordmen, or Normans. And so the Vikings named Northern France after themselves. They called it Normandy. And they began ruling it. But they had a problem. And that was that the French peasants wouldn't learn German. They wouldn't learn to speak the dialects of German that the Vikings were speaking. They kept insisting on speaking French. And so the Norman nobility, Rollo, by the way, got Normandy in 911. The Norman nobility now has to learn French so that when they're abusing their peasants, the peasants understand the abuse. It doesn't help to shout at a peasant and then they don't understand you. You need them to understand. So they learn French. And what that does then is it sets us up for a really strange set of events. Somebody gets a great idea just a few decades later, 999, so 911 to 999, so 88 years later, to hire Norman mercenaries in southern Italy. And so Norman mercenaries start to travel from Northern France all the way to southern Italy. And they're being used by everybody. They're being used by the Romans, who are trying to hold on to southern Italy. They had it. They're losing it. They're trying to get it back. The Roman emperor at the time is a guy named Basil II. You want to laugh, but he was one of the greatest Roman emperors of the time period. And he went on a conquering spree and he starts carving up territory that the Romans had lost and he's putting it back in, including taking lands, Muslim lands. He actually brings the Roman Empire back to Syria and he captures Antioch and the northern end of Syria. The part of Syria that today is in Turkey is basically what he recaptured. So when the Ottoman Empire broke up, the Europeans showed up with a crayon and a napkin and they just began drawing borders. And you look at the border between Saudi Arabia and Jordan or Jordan and Iraq and you're like, why'd you do that? And they sneezed or something. Somebody got bumped and an extra wiggle line popped up. And they did that with Syria. They just chopped off the northern part and gave it to Turkey. So Basel II is re-carving the Roman Empire, but at the same time, there's all these forces pushing back and everybody's using Normans as mercenaries. That must have been awkward. You see your cousin on the other side. How much are you getting paid? And you fight for a little while. I'll pretend to kill you, OK? Don't swing at me. What eventually happens is those Normans go, why are we fighting for these other guys? And in 1030, the first Norman gets made a lord in southern Italy. And he slowly starts to conquer. And subsequent generations of Normans start to take pieces of southern Italy. And in 1061, the Normans are getting on ships and they're crossing over to Sicily. And they begin conquering Sicily. Sicily had been conquered by the Arabs two centuries earlier. The Normans also start getting hired by the Roman Empire in Anatolia, because they're being used to fight the Seljuks, who are coming west and fighting their way into Anatolia.

And so the Romans are using these Norman mercenaries in, I showed you the coin of Romanus IV. In 1071, Romanus IV has an army at a place called Manzikert. And they fight a battle against the Seljuks. And they're defeated. The Romans are defeated. The Normans take off after they were defeated. They just move out of the way. But the Romans get captured, including Romanus IV. He was taken. The Seljuks offered a ransom. The Romans are like, no, we don't ransom you. And they replaced him. The reason that mattered was the Norman commander, Russel de Baerl, decides he's going to do in Anatolia, in the middle of Turkey, by the way, Galatia. So right in the New Testament, Galatians, those are the letters that Paul writes to the Celts living in Anatolia. He decides he's going to carve out a little kingdom for himself in Galatia. And the Normans go on a conquering spree. And they make Ankara, Ankara, the capital of a Norman kingdom in the middle of Turkey. There are French-speaking Vikings ruling the middle of Turkey, which is historically populated by Celts. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. And they're going to conquer it. Historically populated by Celts, you know, kilt-wearing, bagpipe-playing Celts, because everything is actually intermingled and there's no boundaries. And the next thing you know, the Roman emperor is actually turning to the Seljuks and going, dude, can you help us with this guy? And the Seljuks, the ruler, the sultan, the sultanate of Rome, that's what they call themselves. Their flag was a two-headed eagle. The Roman flag was a two-headed eagle. Because when Emperor Romulus Augustus takes off his purple robes and sends it to Emperor Zeno, they've now unified the west and the east. They only have one emperor. So their new symbol for the Roman Empire is an eagle with two heads, one facing left, one facing right. Well, the Seljuks in Anatolia take that as their flag because their goal isn't to destroy the Roman Empire. It's to make a Muslim Roman Empire. Their goal is to eventually capture Constantinople one day. They don't hate the Roman Empire. They admire the Roman Empire. They want to be the Roman Empire. And so Suleiman I, the Seljuk sultanate of Rome, gets a request from the emperor, the Roman emperor, to go put down this Norman uprising. And he's baffled out of his mind. But yeah, sure, I'll help you. And in 1077, that Norman little kingdom vanishes. In 1084, the pope asks for an army to attack Spain. Spain was, at that time, majority-controlled by Muslims. The furthest north city that the Muslims owned in 1084 was a city called Barbastro. And so the pope asks for a Christian army to go to Barbastro and take it. One quarter of that army was a group of Normans. When they capture the city at first, they're pillaging it. They're slaughtering people. But the Normans decide they like the place and they stay. And the majority of the population is still Arab and it's still Muslim. And the Normans who stay start dressing like the Arabs. And they learn Arabic. And they're really digging Arab society. And they go Injun. And they go native. And it shocks everybody because it's like, wait, these French-speaking, blue-eyed, blonde Vikings are in Spain learning Muslim culture. And in a way, when you think about it, all three of these events that I just described are like little precursor crusades. In 1095, the pope holds two conventions. Both of them were in November. And Alexius Comnenus, Alexius I, the Roman Empire, comes to Italy. And this isn't a small thing because Italy isn't Roman. In fact, the pope in Rome and the Roman Empire have had a falling out that has lasted centuries. And they hate each other's guts a lot, not a little bit, a lot. So what happened was, as the Roman Empire was disintegrating, they managed to hold onto pieces of Italy, including the city of Rome. But the pope in Rome didn't like that because the original church had five patriarchs.

So the Orthodox Catholic Church. Orthodox is truth. Catholic is universal. So the Universal Truth Church, that was the original name of the Christian church. It had already had a schism. The Copts in Egypt had broken away in 284. But in the 700s, the church was still unified. But the pope in Rome came to resent the circumstances because the five patriarchs were the pope in Rome, the pope in Alexandria, the patriarch of Antioch, and the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Jerusalem. In other words, the original Christian church had five heads, two popes, two patriarchs, and an archbishop. By the way, pope came from the pope would have his child on his knee. And then people would come to kiss his ring. And they would hear the child saying, papa, papa. And it just stuck. Do you want me to say that again? The pope would have his child on his knee. You know, his kid. His kid, because the original Catholic Church didn't have a celibacy thing. They did the celibacy thing later so that they could make sure that the clergy didn't pass churches and church property down in their wills and illegitimate children in Europe couldn't inherit. So that's how that, that's why that happened. It wasn't to stop the popes from having babies. It was to stop the popes from having legitimate babies. It wasn't to stop the clergy from having families. It's just to stop the clergy from having legitimate families so they couldn't pass on church land. So anyway, in 756, the pope in Rome is sick of the fact that he's kind of second fiddle. He wants to be first fiddle. After all, it's Rome. It's Roman Empire. So he goes and he makes a deal with the Franks. And they break Rome out of the Roman Empire. It's Pope Stephen II who does this in 756. 763, Naples was still in the Roman Empire. Duke Stephen II, two different guys, same name, makes it easy to remember. 763, Naples breaks out of the Roman Empire and joins the pope in creating this papal state thing. Naples is never part of the papal states, but the idea that it's now going to be a separate thing from the Roman Empire, it breaks away. And the animosity between Rome and Constantinople just keeps growing and growing and growing until 1058. In 1058, they get into a spat that's so bitter and so nasty, they start to excommunicate each other. The patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates the pope. The pope excommunicates the patriarch. Next thing you know, they're interdicting. Interdicting is when you excommunicate whole cities, whole countries, whole regions, whole provinces. They start interdicting each other. And before they're done, Western Europe has completely interdicted Eastern Europe. And Eastern Europe has completely interdicted Western Europe. And the East took the truth, and the West took the universe. And that's why there's a Catholic church, a Roman Catholic church, and a Greek Orthodox church. So when Alexios Komnenos goes to Italy in 1095, it's 37 years after they had just done this to each other. So the wounds are raw. They're fresh. And the reason Alexios Komnenos is there is he says, we're not making it. The sultanate of Rome has just taken almost all of Anatolia. We maybe have 10% of it left. We're finished to the east, which means all we have is a little piece of Southeastern Europe. We need your help. And Pope Urban II goes, you know what we should do? We shouldn't just help you a little bit. We should go all out. Let's retake the Holy Land and put it back in the Roman Empire. And Alexios Komnenos goes, yeah, why not? Let's do it. Let's make this happen. And so Pope Urban II comes out of those two talks, meeting with these top officials, including the Roman emperor, and says, I want an army to go to Jerusalem. We're going to conquer all of that and put it back in the Roman Empire. Let's go. 1096, a guy named Peter the Hermit gets up in front of everybody and says, we heard the pope loud and clear. Let's do this. And he puts together what's called the People's Crusade. It's basically just a bunch of peasants, some knights.

It's not the mercenary soldiers. It's not the knight. It's not all knights, right? It's just some peasants. They turn into a mob. And the first thing they do to sanctify the Crusades, this holy religious war, is they attack the Jews living in Germany. And the estimate is they murder about 2,000 Jews, and then they rape like 7,000 more Jews. And then they leave Germany on their way to the Holy Land to... I missed something. I feel like they read a piece of the New Testament that I... Did I? Where does it say that? Before thou goest on the crusade, holiest of holy, do what Jesus would have you do, slaughter Jews in Germany. Did I? And that is the first pogrom. That is the first documented case where Europeans, specifically post-Roman Empire, the Roman Empire hated Jews. Just like it was a hobby for them. They mostly did it in Palestine, right? It was just, ah, the Jews again. They keep throwing rocks at us. That's going to be ironic in a few centuries. So that's the first pogrom. 1096. That army works its way all the way to Constantinople. When it gets to Constantinople, Alexios Komnenos, they've been raiding the whole way because they need to feed themselves. So they're sacking villages. They're tearing into people's food stores. It's a disaster. It's a raiding mob. It shows up at Constantinople. Alexios Komnenos is like, I got to get rid of these guys as fast as I can. He goes, you know what you got to do? You got to cross the Bosporus. Here's my fleet. He puts them on a ship and he sends them across the Bosporus and they set up a camp. They actually attack a town. They capture it. And he's like, I'll send you food. You just stay on your side of the Bosporus. This is going to work out great. In the meantime, he's actually calling the Turks on the phone. Hey, there's some crazy dudes. I just deposited them on your end. Good luck with that. The guy who's now the son of Suleiman I, his name is Khalid Arslan. He decides he's got to get rid of these guys. And they want to take Nicaea. So Nicaea is pronounced Nicaea. I'm going to not say Nicaea again for the rest of the lecture. It drives me nuts. It's like Julius Caesar is Gaius Julius Caesar. Stop saying Julius Caesar. I feel like it could be a salad dressing or something. You know what I mean? It doesn't have to be the name of that guy. Nicaea was the capital for the Sultanate of Rome. So they actually put it almost across from Constantinople. And the reason is because that's their goal. It's Constantinople. They're nowhere near capturing it. They know that. But that's still, you know, it's nice to have a goal, even if it's a far off one. And so they've got Nicaea. It's like poison. And the mob, the peasant mob, the People's Crusade, as it's called, thinks it's going to capture Nicaea. And Clege Arslan basically sets up an ambush for them and slaughters them. And that's the end of the People's Crusade, for the most part. By the way, some of the leadership got away. Because, of course, that's how that usually works out. In any case, the real Crusader army doesn't show up until the next year. The real Crusader army is a mixture of nobles from across France and Germany, primarily, but also Italy, because there's Normans coming. So for our purposes, there's a bunch of Crusaders. There's too many. There's too many names. So I'm just going to simplify it a little bit. The Crusaders you need to know about are Bohemond of Toronto, not Canada, but Italy, and then his nephew, Tancred, and Godfrey de Bouillon, and Baldwin de Bologna. Baldwin and Godfrey are both from northern France. They weren't actually Normans, but they had definitely sided with the Normans. Their father, Eustace II, in fact, was with William the Conqueror in 1066 when the Normans decided to also conquer England. The Normans were very busy people. Oh, let's go to Spain. You know what? I southern it. Anatolia. England. In other words, long after the Vikings started speaking French, they're still tearing up the planet. They're on this permanent, multi-century rampage.

And it wasn't enough for them that they had captured England already twice. They wanted it a third time. They're like, this is good real estate. We want it back. And they got it. And so when Godfrey and Baldwin go on this crusade, they're not actually Normans, but they're part of the Norman sphere. So in a way, the top four of the five most important Crusaders are Normans. The fifth guy is a guy named Raimond. He's Raimond of Toulouse, also known as Raimond Saint-Gilles. He was Raimond the Fourth of Toulouse. And they show up. And Alexius, there's also Hugh de Vermandois. There's a few other guys. But I just want you to know those five. They show up at Constantinople. And they swear an oath of fealty. Well, not Tancred. He refuses. He wants nothing to do with this. And what they promise is that all the land they capture will be handed to Alexius Comnenus, the Roman emperor. And of course, they're lying through their teeth. They have no intention whatsoever of handing anything over. Their goal is to go in there, carve off land, and make their own little personal fiefdoms. They cross over the Bosporus with the Roman navy. It's 1097. Khalid Arslan isn't there to greet them. He's in southern Turkey fighting another Turk. And the reason is that Turk was trying to capture a city from an Armenian, Malatya. And Khalid Arslan was worried if Danishmen captured Malatya, it would put his position, it would weaken his position. So even though he's got this crusader threat on the west, he's so focused on his rivals that he's actually fighting them. He turns around when he realizes the crusaders have landed. He goes as fast as he can. By the time he gets there, Nicaea has already fallen. He convinces other Turks in the area to fight alongside him. They fight the crusaders at Doraleum. And they're defeated. And Khalid Arslan has to withdraw. And they just watch as the crusader army passes. The crusader army then goes through Armenia. So when the Roman Empire lost Anatolia, a piece of the Roman Empire broke away and didn't get captured by the Muslims and remained its own separate thing. It was oftentimes called Lesser Armenia. It was a little Armenian kingdom on what is today the southern coast of Turkey. And so the crusaders arrived there. Tancred was the kind of guy who would look at a situation and he would size it up real quick. He decides to basically conquer it. And he just goes and grabs all the strategic points in Lesser Armenia. And in the process, he's running into Baldwin. Baldwin has the same idea, but he's a little slower. So he keeps arriving after Tancred has done this. And the problem then is Baldwin has the bigger army. So he shows up and Tancred has a problem. Do I fight my fellow crusader, who's basically telling me he's taking my thing from me, or do I walk away? So the first time he walks away, the second time he fights. The crusaders have barely started the crusade and they're already fighting each other. Not many people die for the record. I want to say it was like two guys died and a few dozen are wounded. And then they call off the fight and they negotiate and they make a deal. But still, you can see there's already problems. They get over the mountains, the Tarsus Mountains, and they arrive at Antioch. Antioch is the first prize. So Antioch had only just been captured by the Muslims in 1084. So by the time that the crusaders have arrived, it's 1098. They set up a siege. But Baldwin decides, ah, not interested. And he takes off to the east and he goes to a city called Edessa and he puts Edessa under, he tries to capture Edessa. He doesn't put it under siege. He tries to capture Edessa. And Edessa was ruled by Armenians. And so Baldwin goes to the Armenians and he starts working out a deal with them. The leader of the Armenians in Edessa was a guy named Thoros. And Baldwin talks Thoros into adopting him and then letting him marry Thoros' daughter so that he will become now the heir to Edessa. And Thoros goes, okay. Well, Armenian culture was that when you, presumably, one of the chroniclers says this.

I'm not sure it's actually true. That's one of the problems you always have when you're reading historical accounts. You're always like, mm, did that really happen? According to the chronicler, Armenian culture was when you got adopted, your adoptive father and mother wore a really big gown and then you would take off your top, you'd have pants on, and then you would crawl under the gown, but they're completely naked under, and you hug them. Anyway, so apparently that's what Baldwin did with Thoros and his wife. And then he waited around for a while until a mob grabbed Thoros and his wife and hanged them. And that's the birth of the first crusader state. We now have the county of Edessa. Baldwin is the first crusader lord to rule a chunk of territory. I think it was May 1098. In the meantime, the siege in Antioch is still going on. Bohemond is the guy who wants Antioch for himself, but so does Raimond. So there's now two crusaders both pushing for it, but the problem is they still gotta capture it first. They haven't captured it. The guy who was the ruler of Antioch was a guy named Yarhisian. And Yarhisian starts putting out feelers to see if he can get help to break this, the crusader siege. And there's two guys nearby. There's the guy who's running Damascus, because even though they're part of the Seljuk Empire, the Seljuk Empire is already coming apart at the seams. The Seljuk warlords don't like each other. They don't cooperate. They see each other as rivals. They're constantly backstabbing each other. And the guy in charge of Damascus is a guy named Dukak. And Dukak's brother, Ridwan, is the guy in charge of Aleppo. They hate each other's guts. They see each other as rivals. So Yarhisian sends for help from Dukak. Dukak takes an army, and he has to go past Aleppo, right? And he's coming up past Aleppo. He gets to line of sight of the crusader army. He panics. He turns around, and he heads back to Damascus. So Yarhisian is like, oh, what do I do? I guess I have to talk to Ridwan. But he doesn't want anything to do with Ridwan, because Ridwan has a group of allies that he didn't like. The Hashishans. The Hashishans were Shia who decided they didn't like the direction Islam was going in. Sunnis were systematically winning. The Seljuks were Sunnis. And the Seljuks had replaced the Buyids, who were Shia, and had been defeating the Fatimids, not replace them. The Fatimids were also Shia. And so there is this guy, Hassan al-Sabah, who decides he wants to take a different approach to fight for the Shia cause. And that different approach is he's going to get into political intrigue, spying, and assassinating people. And Hashishan is where we get the word assassin from. Now, whether or not they used Hashish, we don't really know. That could have been the chroniclers trying to make a story up. In any case, Hassan al-Sabah's followers were total fanatics. And Ridwan, the ruler of Aleppo, was totally into them. And they were friends. And they were working together. And so this scares Hashishan. So he doesn't really want anything to do with this. He asks Ridwan to send an army. And Ridwan does pretty much the same thing Dukak does. And nothing comes of it. So Hashishan realizes he's running out of food. He's running out of time. But so are the crusaders. The crusaders are literally starving to death. They've been traveling for months. It's a year now. And they're running out of supplies. And they've been slaughtering their horses along the way. For food purposes, they're down to like 800 horses. And probably half the crusader army is already gone by this point. Some of them died. Some of them got sick. Some of them broke a leg. Some of them just were like, you know what? I don't need this. And they turned around and they headed home. So now, you can see on the inside, Antioch is desperate because he's trying to figure out how he's going to get through this. And the crusaders like Bohemond and Rahamund are trying to figure out how they're going to get in the walls.

And at that point, another guy jumps into the story. And the other guy is the ruler of Mosul, Karbuka. Karbuka, this Yahishan convinces Karbuka to come with an army. But Karbuka has to pass Edessa on the way. And he's looking at Edessa. And he goes, this Baldwin has it. I want it. And so he stops his army. For three weeks, he parks it outside of Edessa. And then he decides he can't take it. And so he abandons the siege. And he heads to Antioch. But by the time he gets to Antioch, his generals are working against him. And so there's all this intrigue going on before he even gets to Antioch. But even though he's still heading to Antioch, it's kind of too late. Because in the meantime, because he took so long, because he added those three weeks, there was a guy named Firuz. Firuz was accused of dealing on the black market even though he knew and was a friend of Yahishan. And so he gets charged a heavy fine. He's so furious about this that he decides to betray his own people. Firuz tells the crusaders, I'm going to let you in to the city. The crusaders are like, why would we believe you? This is probably a trap. He goes, I'm going to give you my son. If it's a trap, kill my son. Crusaders are like, really? OK. Why are you doing this? He goes, I want land, gold, and vengeance. They go, OK. We can give you all three of those. And so in the night, he had access to a window that looked out over the walls. And he just dropped a really long rope down. And the crusaders came up the rope one at a time till there were about 500 guys inside the city. And they began fighting for the gate. Yahishan hears the sound. He panics. He jumps on a horse. And he rides off. He leaves his son and wife and family behind. He just takes off. He doesn't even assess the situation. He just figures, it's over. I'm out of here. He rides for days. He finally collapses from riding. His entourage try to put him back on the horse. They can't get him back on the horse. He's having a depression bout or something. He just lays on the side of the road. A peasant walks by, recognizes who he is, and cuts his head off and takes it to the crusaders and gets a reward. In the meantime, Yahishan's son, Shams al-Daula, son of the state, sun as in the thing in the sky, not child. Shams al-Daula, isn't that a cool name? Who would name their kid that? Anyway, Shams is beautiful, but of the state? Anyway, he's got the citadel, and he's holding on to it. He's like, OK, they've got the city. But he's also watching what the crusaders are doing in the city. They're not kind conquerors. They're not walking through and going, oh, hi, everybody. How's it going? They are murdering everybody. They're just going through the streets, slaughtering the inhabitants of Antioch. They're killing the men. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the poor. They're killing the elderly. They're killing the women. They're killing the babies. They're leaving nobody. And Shams is up there in the citadel going, what? Who are these people? Why are they doing this? Why wouldn't you want the city intact, somebody to tax, somebody to work for you? Why are you slaughtering the city? And there's nothing you can do about it except resist and hold on to the citadel. That's when Karbuka's army shows up. Too late. Shams actually sneaks out of the city to go meet with him to try and coordinate what's going to happen next. How are they going to fight for the city? Because he hasn't given up. Karbuka fires him on the spot. He goes, you're done. You're not going back to the citadel. He then sets up his army to fight. But the princes who are with him fear, Dukak and Ridwan, that if he succeeds, he will then be able to establish authority over Aleppo and Damascus. And so they actually pull off the field and start heading home. And when the rest of his army sees this, they lose heart. The crusaders see what's happening. They see them pulling away. So they come running out of the gate because the crusaders had just found the lance that speared Jesus.

The Romans check to see if he's dead by spearing him. Because if fluid comes out, it means he's drowned in his own fluids. Because that's the goal of crucifixion, is to drown you slowly. And they found the lance that did this. It's not probably, right? Probably what happened was a monk took a lance and buried it and said, I'm pretty sure it's somewhere around here. You guys should dig for it. They dig. They find it. They're like, it's a miracle. And they come charging out of the city towards Kabuka's army. His army's morale has collapsed. His morale has collapsed. They just turn and run away. And the crusaders don't pursue them because they think it must be a trap because they can't figure out why the larger army just ran away for no reason. And then they have their city. There's a brief struggle between Raimond and Bohemond. Bohemond wins. And Bohemond gets to keep Antioch. And then the rest of the crusaders go, we're not here for Antioch. We're here for Jerusalem. Let's keep going. Bohemond goes, I'm good. I got what I wanted. I just wanted one of the richest cities on the planet. Although it's not rich anymore because you just killed its inhabitants. Anyway, I don't understand. They start marching to Jerusalem. The next city they come upon is a town called Ma'ara. When they arrive at Ma'ara, the population fights as hard as they can. So it's soldiers and citizens holding onto the city as hard as they can. But eventually the crusaders get in and they capture the city. When they do, the crusaders murder all 20,000 inhabitants and eat them. So there's multiple sources that say this on both sides. It's always good to have both sides saying it. I know of three sources that are from the crusader side that say they ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. And they describe it in slightly different ways, but it's mostly the same. One of them says that they spit at the adults and the children and just roasted them over a fire. Another one says that they would cut chunks of flesh off of them and then roast the individual pieces over a fire. But it's pretty widespread agreement that the crusaders ate the inhabitants of Ma'ara. But there's a lesson in this story that applies to today. So one of the things people will do who want to defend an indefensible position is they'll find something to nitpick. So one of the crusaders says that the people were tortured first, one of the crusader chronicles. But none of the Muslim chronicles say that the people were tortured first. And so what I've seen happen, even on BBC, is somebody will say, well, they may have eaten the people, but they didn't torture them. So first of all, I think if you slaughter 20,000 people, including the children in front of the parents, that's torture. But then second, I kind of don't care if that crusader's chronicles said there was torture and there wasn't or not, because I still think there was a horrible crime committed here. Why are you focusing on that one thing? So no Muslims are saying there was torture. Only one crusader was saying there was torture. Nobody's having an argument with you, dude. There's no, sure, there's no torture. They just killed them and ate them. The reason I'm bringing this up is you see this kind of nitpicking. Like, for example, with the Holocaust, Holocaust deniers, I have seen, focus on the number. So for the record, it wasn't 6 million Jews. It was probably 5.1 to 5.4. 6 million is a slight exaggeration. It's not a big exaggeration, but it's a slight exaggeration. So the Holocaust deniers would focus on the number. Well, it wasn't 6 million. If you just take the 5.1, you took away their ability to do this. And now you can, well, how about the 5.1? And then there's nowhere they can go, because that's the number. The 5.4 is also a number, possibly. But just go with the low. 5.1 is already a horrific, nightmarish, hellish, evil. It doesn't have to be 6. You see what I'm saying? It doesn't have to have been torture. We're good with it just being cannibalism.

So be careful when you're arguing, when you're dealing with people. What is that called? I feel like it's distraction. It's not gaslighting. It's a little different thing. It's like, yeah, but what about? Anyway, the Crusaders then approached Tarabulus, Tripoli. It was one of the wealthiest cities on the planet at the time. So was Antioch, by the way, but not anymore. Tarabulus had a library in it with 100,000 books. It was ruled by a qadi, as opposed to a guy who took the title of maybe king or something. It was ruled by a guy who had the title, basically, judge, which is kind of cool. And the city was rich. It had these big walls around it. The Crusaders set up a siege. There was no point. There was no way they were getting in. So they bypass it. And then they decide, you know what? Let's just keep bypassing. We have Antioch. We have Edessa. We have Ma'ara. Let's just go straight to Jerusalem. Why are we capturing anything else? So they bypass Beirut. They bypass Arsuf, Acre. They just don't deal with any of it. Sur, Fayda, they go straight to Jerusalem. When they get there, they immediately attack it. They don't have any ladders. They don't have any siege equipment. This city has a wall on it. It has a citadel. So the Crusaders just go like a mob, charging up to the thing. And they're like banging on. And the defenders are pouring oil on them, shooting them with arrows, going, they can't get in here. Why are they doing this? And hundreds of them are wounded and killed for no effect. So then the Crusaders set up a siege. The problem is that Jerusalem is brilliantly designed to not be siegeable. So all the sprigs are inside the wall. So the area around it is arid. So the army stuck trying to besiege this thing basically has to run a water line to the Jordan River and by bucket bring the water to the army. That's a tough thing to do. But that's what they're going to do. And they're praying. They're hoping that God will intercede and give them a break. And it may not have been God, but it was the Genovese. The Genovese show up with some English volunteers by ship. And the Genovese brought the material needed to build siege equipment. They build the siege equipment, and they attack the city. So a little bit of, I'm going to bring in another actor, another player. So Egypt had been taken over by the Fatimids. The Fatimids were Shia who had started in North Africa. They took over Egypt. By the way, they found Cairo, 969. Cairo is just barely over 1,000 years old. It's such a baby for the Middle East, right? Middle Easters go, oh, you're 1,000? Oh, you're so young. You're so young. Your whole life is ahead of you. Of course, Cairo is a mega massive city. It's the sixth largest metropolitan area on the planet. There's only three metropolitan areas on the planet that aren't in Asia that are in the top 10. Cairo, Sao Paulo in Brazil, and Mexico City are the three that aren't in Asia. Everything else is Shanghai and Tokyo and Calcutta. You know what I mean? So the Fatimids are doing all right, but something really weird is happening. The Fatimids hated the Seljuks, but the Fatimids liked the Romans. They were allies. So when this whole crusade thing happened, in the mind of the Fatimids, who had just lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks a few years earlier, what's going to happen is the crusaders, who are technically in the service of the Roman Empire, are going to split that land. Syria will go to the Romans. Palestine will go to Egypt. That's what they're thinking is going to happen. So they decide, let's go grab Jerusalem from the Seljuks before the crusaders arrive to do our part in this alliance. They have an explicit alliance with Rome. This isn't like they're speculating. This is the deal that they've made with Alexios Komnenos. And so they send an army. They defeat the Seljuks. They capture Jerusalem. And then they send an envoy to meet with the crusaders. And the crusaders just keep coming. And the Egyptians are like, what are you doing?

No, no, you stay on that side. That's the deal. We're going to split this. And the crusaders just keep coming. And it becomes clear to the Fatimids, they're going to fight. They're allies. So they dig in. And that's when the siege equipment comes and the crusaders break in. And the Egyptian general in command of the defense of Jerusalem, Iftikhar, is looking at this going, how do I fight this now that the crusaders have a sectional wall? And so he retreats his men to the citadel. Once they're in the citadel, there's nothing he can do for the population of Jerusalem. All he can do is he can hold on. It's basically a thorn in their side. He's going to make it so that the crusaders can't control Jerusalem, but they can control parts of Jerusalem. And he won't control any of the merchant part of Jerusalem, the commerce part of Jerusalem. He'll just have a military piece. And eventually, he'll run out of supplies. And their goal is to fight to the death. There's no point. They saw what happened at Ma'ara, and they saw what happened at Antioch. They know who the crusaders are. They're supposed to be allies. They're being backstabbed. They get it. But the crusaders really want the city. And so they start negotiating. And the deal that they come up with, Raymond Saint-Gilles comes up with, is the following, that the Egyptians will leave in groups of five. They'll leave the citadel, and then they'll exit the city five at a time. That way, if the crusaders break their word, turn on them, they'll only kill those five dudes who are in the middle of leaving. And then the guys that are still in the citadel, they can just keep fighting. And anybody who escaped has already escaped. And that's the deal. So the first five go, and then another five, and another five. And you know the last five were like, oh, god, you know they're going to turn on us. But they don't. And the last five get away. And then the crusaders go over to the gate, and they close it. They go over to the Muslim quarter, and they just begin murdering everybody. They're just walking through the city, slaughtering person after person. Tancred, the guy that I talked about, with the strategic mind who kept running into trouble with Baldwin until Baldwin took Edessa, he can't take it. He's like, what are we doing? He runs over to a group of Muslims who were running. And he's like, whoa, whoa, I'm not going to kill you. He hands them his banner. And he says, if crusaders approach you, say you're with Tancred. And show them my banner, and they won't harm you. And they're, of course, grateful. And then he just sort of runs around the city trying to figure out what to loot and how to save people's lives. He hasn't given up the looting. Don't be naive about this. But he's also like, let's not just murder everybody. And he describes in his own memoir, later on coming upon that group of Muslims laying there dead on his bloody banner. The crusaders didn't even care. They're just like, you're with Tancred? A group of Muslims realize there's no surviving this. This is over. So they decide, let's go to the mosque. Let's die praying. And so they barricade themselves inside the mosques. The crusaders eventually smash the doors open. They slaughter everybody inside. They get buckets of water. They wash the blood out. They go to the top of the minaret. They break the crescent moon off, and they stick a cross on top. They say a prayer. Boom. Insta-church. Then they go to the Jewish quarter. Because see, Jerusalem was in four quarters. A Muslim quarter, two Christian quarters, and a Jewish quarter. Why are the crusaders here? So that Christians can own Jerusalem. Because clearly they could be there if they had half the city. Not interesting. So they go to the Jewish quarter. And the Jews know what's coming. It's not rocket science here. So they just start running to synagogues. They figure, you know, let's do like those Muslims did. We'll die in prayer. The crusaders believed that Jews were so horrible, so evil, you couldn't wash out the synagogue afterwards and turn it into a church.

So they just piled wood around the synagogues and burned them to the ground, burning the Jews inside alive. And then they go to the two Christian quarters. And of course, at this point, the Christian population is peeing itself. Because it's just watched half the city get exterminated. And they go, you have the true cross, where is it? And the Christians go, we're not telling you. You're savages. And the crusaders go, OK, we got you. And they start murdering the Christian clergy. They're like, who's a priest? Let's have your priest. And they just start slaughtering the priests. They're like, when we're done, we're going to do the deacons. And then we're going to start working on your families. Eventually, somebody tells them, here's the true cross. Please stop killing us. And they stop massacring the Christians as well. But then they turn to the Christians and go, remember that great schism in 1058? These Catholic priests are your new priests. Get used to it. We're not doing that anymore. Your orthodox ways are out. And they're like, yeah, whatever. And that's how the crusaders captured Jerusalem. Isn't that a heartwarming story? Is that too much sarcasm? At that point, the Egyptians are trying to figure out what to do. They send an army to Ascalon with the hope that they'll eventually be able to come back and fight to capture Jerusalem back. Godfrey is named the new ruler of Jerusalem. He does not take the title king. So he's just the ruler. We'll get to that later. He takes his army. He runs to Ascalon. And the Egyptians were in disarray. They weren't expecting this. And so they weren't set up properly. And he attacks them within their disarray. And a bunch of them fall back. They drop into the fortress. The rest of them escape. And the crusaders get another win. They don't capture Ascalon. But they definitely humiliate the Egyptian army and buy themselves some time. The Egyptians aren't done. Their leader is a guy named Al-Aftal Shahanshah. Now, Shahanshah is not Arabic. It's Persian. But Al-Aftal is. The best leader of leaders is his name. Dude, if you have that as your name, you need to get into politics. That's incredible. That's incredible. Anyway, so Al-Aftal is actually a slave. Isn't that weird? And he's actually Armenian. So the guy running the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt, it has a caliph, a khalifa. It has a Shia khalifa. The guy running it is actually an Armenian slave. There's an actual khalifa who's a Shia Arab. But the guy running it, the wazir, is an Armenian slave named the best leader of leaders. And he's like, we're not doing this. He sends an army. They attack Ramla. Godfrey is dead. Godfrey dies. We don't know why. There's one person says that he was killed in battle. Another person said he got sick. Another person said he was poisoned. Godfrey's dead. He was literally the ruler of Jerusalem for a year. He's replaced by Baldwin, the guy that captured Edessa. He comes down. It's his brother. So the chronicler said that when Baldwin received the news, he was very happy, but also a little sad that his brother had died. And he comes down, and he's crowned king. And that's the moment in the year 1100 that the kingdom of Jerusalem is officially going, because there's now a king. But Godfrey was at 1099 when they captured Jerusalem. He meets Al-Afdal at Ramla in 1101. And he defeats the Egyptian army. The Egyptian army withdraws. They come back the next year, because Al-Afdal is not going to give up easily. They attack Ramla. And this time, they beat the crusaders. The crusaders fall to Jaffa. And in the second battle at Jaffa, the crusaders win again. The Egyptians withdraw. They come back in 1105 to do it again. They attack Ramla. And they're defeated a third time. And the Egyptians give it a rest. They're like, OK, we're exhausted losing. In the meantime, something really critical happens for the purposes of how the crusades are going to unfold. And it's the Battle of Haran. So Haran used to be called Karhaye.

Karhaye is where the Romans fought the Persians for the first time in 53 BC. And the Romans were, I mean, just summarily defeated. It was a catastrophe. 26,000 Romans against 8,000 Persians. And the Persians maybe lost like 100, 150. And the Romans lost like 13,000 dead, 10,000 captured. So the crusaders are going to do another Karhaye, only the city's been renamed Haran. And the Muslim army comes out to meet it at Haran. It's southeast of Edessa. And the crusaders are defeated. They are beaten in the field. And in fact, one of the crusaders is captured. His name is Baldwin. But it's a different Baldwin. It's not the king of Jerusalem. It's his cousin. I think it's his cousin. And his cousin's name was Baldwin Borsk. That's what's in my, Borsk, I think is what it was. And he's become the count of Edessa when Baldwin becomes the king of Jerusalem. And so he goes into captivity. And he's stuck in captivity for four years. And while he's in captivity, Bohemond himself also gets captured. And he ends up in captivity. So there's two crusaders that are now out of the picture because they've been captured. And then Raimon decides he wants Terabolus. So Raimon was probably supposed to become the king. But for whatever reason, he decided he didn't want to be the king of Jerusalem. He wanted to be the king of Terabolus. So what he did was he set up a siege for Terabolus after they captured Jerusalem in 1102. And he's built a fortress north of Terabolus. And he's fighting day after day. The defenders of Tripoli come out late in 1104. They set his fortress on fire. Raimon himself is severely injured in the fire. He survives it but dies like three or four months later from his wounds. So the crusaders have now lost basically three, four of their top crusaders. Godfrey is dead. Raimon is dead. Bohemond is in captivity. Baldwin, spoiler alert, who will become Baldwin II, who will become the second king of Jerusalem, is in captivity. So that's a weird story, obviously. And so they're in trouble. By this point, most of the crusaders have actually gone home. In other words, if the Muslims had just attacked in an organized fashion at that moment, there was nothing to stop them from just taking it all back. But the Muslims are in such disarray. And each of these Turkish warlords, these Seljuk warlords, hates each other's guts so much they just won't cooperate together. It gets so weird that at some point, 1108, there's going to be a battle. Baldwin gets released. And Baldwin is going to make a deal with the ruler of Mosul. And he's going to field an army. So it's going to be a crusader army next to a Seljuk army. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight against each other. They're going to fight together. They're going to fight Tancred. Tancred ended up becoming the regent of Edessa while Baldwin was in prison. Tancred doesn't want to give it up. He doesn't want Baldwin to come back. Tancred goes and he gets Ridwan, the guy from Aleppo. So there's a Tancred. The crusader has a Muslim ally. And they're next to each other in the field. And they're going to fight a battle against a Muslim crusader army. And by the way, they defeat Jawali and Baldwin. They have to escape. And Tancred basically keeps Edessa as a result. He's eventually talked into participating in the siege of Tarabulus. They're going to actually try and take it once and for all. And when he does that, he reconciles with Baldwin. But here we are. It's 1108. The crusaders just captured Jerusalem nine years earlier. And there's a battle where there's Muslims and crusaders on both sides fighting each other. Like, it's already gone sideways in every way you can imagine. And that's the first part of the Crusades. Having said that, there's so much more to this story, which is what I warned you from the beginning. Like, I am not going to get through the Crusades. I literally got you to 1108. By the way, my goal was 1125. But I think I'm basically out of time. So I'm surrendering and accepting I'm not going to get to my goal.

But to put things in perspective, the second crusade is 1145. The kingdom of Jerusalem is going to go down in a ball of flames. In case you didn't know that, I hope I didn't spoil this for you. But in 1187, after the Battle of Hattin. So then the third crusade is after that. And then there's a fourth crusade in 1202. And so in other words, the Crusades are just going to keep going for a while. And they actually don't end by most people's. The usual number we use is 1291. So it's 195 years. I've just covered nine of it. Well, 12 if you include the, well, even more. 13 if you include the peasant crusade. By the way, there's supposedly a children crusade in this. It's a lot of fun. The Crusades were great. I'm going to tell you the children crusade. I'm going to let you go. It happens later. So this is out of time sequence. But it's just too fun since I mentioned it. A group of children think if they go and just show up in Jerusalem, the Muslims will give it back. Because this is after the Battle of Hattin. So they don't, children obviously walking from France to Palestine is a little tricky. So what they do is they walk to Venice. And they show up. And they ask, will you, the Venetian Navy, just take us? And the Venetians go, yeah, of course. It would be our sacred duty to take you. And the children are never heard from again. They were sold into slavery. The Venetians just put them on the ships, took them to slave markets, and just. Isn't that just capitalism? I'm pretty sure that's just capitalism. All right. Thank you for your time. And if you want to come see my show and tell, I'll stick around to let you do that. And actually, you know what? I'll field a question. And then I'll let you go. How about that? I always forget to do that. I actually don't always. No? No questions? OK, good. We're done.

So, it shouldn't be surprising that we will start today with triple integrals. OK, so the way triple integrals work is if I give you a function of three variables, x, y, z, and I give you some region in space, so, some solid, then I can take the integral over this region over function f dV where dV stands for the volume element. OK, so what it means is we will just take every single little piece of our solid, take the value of f there, multiply by the small volume of each little piece, and sum all these things together.
And, so this volume element here, well, for example, if you are doing the integral in rectangular coordinates, that will become dx dy dz or any permutation of that because, of course, we have lots of possible orders of integration to choose from. So, rather than bore you with theory and all sorts of complicated things, let's just do examples. And, you will see, basically, if you understand how to set up iterated integrals into variables, that you basically understand how to do them in three variables. You just have to be a bit more careful. And, there's one more step. OK, so let's take our first triple integral to be on the region.
 
So, of course, there's two different things as always. There is the region of integration and there's the function we are integrating. Now, the function we are integrating, well, it will come in handy when you actually try to evaluate the integral. But, as you can see, probably, the new part is really hard to set it up. So, the function won't really matter that much for me. So, in the examples I'll do today, functions will be kind of silly. So, for example, let's say that we want to look at the region between two paraboloids, one given by z = x ^2 y ^2.
The other is z = 4 - x ^2 - y ^2. And, so, I haven't given you, yet, the function to integrate. OK, this is not the function to integrate. This is what describes the region where I will integrate my function. And, let's say that I just want to find the volume of this region, which is the triple integral of just one dV. OK, similarly, remember, when we try to find the area of the region in the plane, we are just integrating one dA. Here we integrate one dV. that will give us the volume. Now, I know that you can imagine how to actually do this one as a double integral. But, the goal of the game is to set up the triple integral. It's not actually to find the volume.
So, what does that look like? Well, z = x ^2 y ^2, that's one of our favorite paraboloids. That's something that looks like a parabola with its bottom at the origin that you spin about the z axis. And, z equals four minus x squared minus y squared, well, that's also a paraboloid. But, this one is pointing down, and when you take x equals y equals zero, you get z equals four. So, it starts at four, and it goes down like that. OK, so the solid that we'd like to consider is what's in between in here. So, it has a curvy top which is this downward paraboloid, a curvy bottom which is the other paraboloid.
And, what about the sides? Well, do you have any idea what we get here? Yeah, it's going to be a circle because entire picture is invariant by rotation about the z axis. So, if you look at the picture just, say, in the yz plane, you get this point and that point. And, when you rotate everything around the z axis, you will just get a circle here. OK, so our goal is to find the volume of this thing, and there's lots of things I could do to simplify the calculation, or even not do it as a triple integral at all.
But, I want to actually set it up as a triple integral just to show how we do that. OK, so the first thing we need to do is choose an order of integration. And, here, well, I don't know if you can see it yet, but hopefully soon that will be intuitive to you. I claim that I would like to start by integrating first over z. What's the reason for that? Well, the reason is if I give you x and y, then you can find quickly, what's the bottom and top values of z for that choice of x and y? OK, so if I have x and y given, then I can find above that: what is the bottom z and the top z corresponding to the vertical line above that point? The portion of it that's inside our solid, so somehow, there's a bottom z and a top z.
And, so the top z is actually on the downward paraboloid. So, it's four minus x squared minus y squared. The bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared. OK, so if I want to start to set this up, I will write the triple integral. And then, so let's say I'm going to do it dz first, and then, say, dy dx. It doesn't really matter. So then, for a given value of x and y, I claim z goes from the bottom surface. The bottom face is z equals x squared plus y squared. The top face is four minus x squared minus y squared. OK, is that OK with everyone? Yeah?
Any questions so far? Yes? Why did I start with z? That's a very good question. So, I can choose whatever order I want, but let's say I did x first . Then, to find the inner

integral bounds, I would need to say, OK, I've chosen values of, see, in the inner integral, you've fixed the two other variables, and you're just going to vary that one. And, you need to find bounds for it. So, if I integrate over x first, I have to solve, answer the following question.
Say I'm given values of y and z. What are the bounds for x? So, that would mean I'm slicing my solid by lines that are parallel to the x axis. And, see, it's kind of hard to find, what are the values of x at the front and at the back? I mean, it's possible, but it's easier to actually first look for z at the top and bottom. Yes? dy dx, or dx dy? No, it's completely at random. I mean, you can see x and y play symmetric roles. So, if you look at it, it's reasonably clear that z should be the easiest one to set up first for what comes next. xy or yx, it's the same. Yes? Yes, it will be easier to use cylindrical coordinates. I'll get to that just as soon as I'm done with this one. OK, so let's continue a bit with that. And, as you mentioned, actually we don't actually want to do it with xy in the end.
In a few minutes, we will actually switch to cylindrical coordinates. But, for now, we don't even know what they are. OK, so I've done the inner integral by looking at, you know, if I slice by vertical lines, what is the top? What is the bottom for a given value of x and y? So, the bounds in the inner integral depend on both the middle and outer variables. Next, I need to figure out what values of x and y I will be interested in. And, the answer for that is, well, the values of x and y that I want to look at are all those that are in the shade of my region. So, in fact, to set up the middle and outer bounds, what I want to do is project my solid. So, my solid looks like this kind of thing.
And, I don't really know how to call it. But, what's interesting now is I want to look at the shadow that it casts in the xy plane. OK, and, of course, that shadow will just be the disk that's directly below this disk here that's separating the two halves of the solid. And so, now I will want to integrate over, I want to look at all the xy's, x and y, in the shadow. So, now I'm left with, actually, something we've already done, namely setting up a double integral over x and y. So, if it helps, here, we don't strictly need it, but if it helps, it could be useful to actually draw a picture of this shadow in the xy plane.
So, here it would just look, again, like a disk, and set it up. Now, the question is, how do we find the size of this disk, the size of the shadow? Well, basically we have to figure out where our two paraboloids intersect. There's nothing else. OK, so, one way how to find the shadow in the xy plane -- -- well, here we actually know the answer a priori, but even if we didn't, we could just say, well, our region lives wherever the bottom surface is below the top surface, OK, so we want to look at things wherever bottom value of z is less than the top value of z, I mean, less or less than or equal, that's the same thing.
So, if the bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared should be less than four minus x squared minus y squared, and if you solve for that, then you will get, well, so let's move these guys over here. You'll get two x squared plus two y squared less than four. That becomes x squared plus y squared less than two. So, that means that's a disk of radius square root of two, OK? So, we kind of knew in advance it was going to be a disk, but what we've learned now is that this radius is square root of two.

So, if we want to set up, if we really want to set it up using dy dx like they started, then we can do it because we know, so, for the middle integral, now, we want to fix a value of x. And, for that fixed value of x, we want to figure out the bounds for y. Well, the answer is y goes from here to here. What's here? Well, here, y is square root of two minus x squared. And, here it's negative square root of two minus x squared.
So, y will go from negative square root of two minus x squared to positive square root. And then, x will go from negative root two to root two. OK, if that's not completely clear to you, then I encourage you to go over how we set up double integrals again. OK, does that make sense, kind of? Yeah? Well, so, when we set up, remember, we are setting up a double integral, dy dx here. So, when we do it dy dx, it means we slice this region of a plane by vertical line segments. So, this middle guy would be what used to be the inner integral. So, in the inner, remember, you fix the value of x, and you ask yourself, what is the range of values of y in my region? So, y goes from here to here, and what here and here are depends on the value of x.
How? Well, we have to find the relation between x and y at these points. These points are on the circle of radius root two. So, if you want this circle maybe I should have written, is x squared plus y squared equals two. And, if you solve for y, given x, you get plus minus root of two minus x squared, OK? Yes? Is there a way to compute this with symmetry? Well, certainly, yeah, this solid looks sufficiently symmetric, but actually you could certainly, if you don't want to do the whole disk, you could just do quarter disks, and multiply by four. You could even just look at the lower half of the solid, and multiply them by two, so, total by eight.
So, yeah, certainly there's lots of ways to make it slightly easier by using symmetry. Now, the most spectacular way to use symmetry here, of course, is to use that we have this rotation symmetry and switch, actually, not do this guy in xy coordinates but instead in polar coordinates. So -- So, the smarter thing to do would be to use polar coordinates instead of x and y. Of course, we want to keep z. I mean, we are very happy with z the way it is. But, we'll just change x and y to R cos theta, R sine theta, OK, because, well, let's see actually how we would evaluate this guy.
So, well actually, let's not. It's kind of boring. So, let me just point out one small thing here, sorry, before I do that. So, if you start computing the inner integral, OK, so let me not do that yet, sorry, so if you try to compute the inner integral, you'll be integrating from x squared plus y squared to four minus x squared minus y squared dz. Well, that will integrate to z between these two bounds. So, you will get four minus two x squared minus two y squared. Now, when you put that into the remaining ones, you'll get something that's probably not very pleasant of four minus two x squared minus two y squared dy dx.
And here, you see that to evaluate this, you would switch to polar coordinates. Oh, by the way, so if your initial instincts had been to, given that you just want the volume, you could also have found the volume just by doing a double integral of the height between the top and bottom. Well, you would just have gotten this, right, because this is the height between top and bottom. So, it's all the same. It doesn't really matter. But with this, of course, we will be able to integrate all sorts of functions, not just one over the solid. So, we will be able to do much more than just volumes. OK, so let's see, how do we do it with polar coordinates instead? Well, so --

Well, that would become, so let's see. So, I want to keep dz. But then, dx dy or dy dx would become r dr d theta. And, if I try to set up the bounds, well, I probably shouldn't keep this x squared plus y squared around. But, x squared plus y squared is easy in terms of r and theta. That's just r squared. OK, I mean, in general I could have something that depends also on theta. That's perfectly legitimate. But here, it simplifies, and this guy up here, four minus x squared minus y squared becomes four minus r squared.
And now, the integral that we have to do over r and theta, well, we look again at the shadow. The shadow is still a disk of radius root two. That hasn't changed. And now, we know how to set up this integral in polar coordinates. r goes from zero to root two, and theta goes from zero to two pi. OK, and now it becomes actually easier to evaluate. OK, so now we have actually a name for this because we're doing it in space. So, these are called, actually, cylindrical coordinates. So, in fact, you already knew about cylindrical coordinates even if you did not know the name.
OK, so the idea of cylindrical coordinates is that instead of x, y, and z, to locate a point in space, you will use three coordinates. One of them is basically how high it is above the xy plane. So, that will be z. And then, you will use polar coordinates for the projection of your point on the xy plane. So, r will be the distance from the z axis. And theta will be the angle from the x axis counterclockwise. So, the one thing to be careful about is because of the usual convention, that we make the x axis point toward us. Theta equals zero is no longer to the right. Now, theta equals zero is to the front, and the angel is measured from the front counterclockwise.
OK, so, and of course, if you want to know how to convert between x, y, z and r theta z, well, the formulas are just the same as in usual polar coordinates. R cos theta, r sine theta, and z remain z. OK, so why are these called cylindrical coordinates, by the way? Well, let's say that I gave you the equation r equals a, where a is some constant. Say r equals one, for example. So, r equals one in 2D, that used to be just a circle of radius one. Now, in space, a single equation actually defines a surface, not just a curve anymore. And, the set of points where r is a, well, that's all the points that are distance a from the z axis. So, in fact, what you get this way is a cylinder of radius a centered on the z axis.
OK, so that's why they are called cylindrical coordinates. By the way, so now, similarly, if you look at the equation theta equals some given value, well, so that used to be just a ray from the origin. Now, that becomes a vertical half plane. For example, if I set the value of theta and let r and z vary, well, r is always positive, but basically that means I am taking a vertical plane that comes out in this direction.
OK, any questions about cylindrical coordinates? Yes? Yeah, so I'm saying when you fix theta, you get only a half plane, not a full plane. I mean, it goes all the way up and down, but it doesn't go back to the other side of the z axis. Why? That's because r is always positive by convention. So, for example, here, we say theta is zero. At the back, we say theta is pi. We don't say theta is zero and r is negative. We say r is positive and theta is pi. It's a convention, largely. But, sticking with this convention really will help you to set up the integrals properly. I mean, otherwise there is just too much risk for mistakes. Yes?
Well, so the question is if I were to use symmetry to do this one, would I multiply by four or by two? Well, it depends on how much symmetry you are using. So, I mean, it's your choice. You can multiply by two, by four, by eight depending on how much

you cut it. So, it depends on what symmetry you use, if you use symmetry between top and bottom you'd say, well, the volume is twice the lower half. If you use the left and right half, you would say it's twice each half. If you cut it into four pieces, and so on.
So, and again, you don't have to use the symmetry. If you don't think of using polar coordinates, then it can save you from doing, you know, you can just start at zero here and here, and simplify things a tiny bit. But, OK, yes? So, to define a vertical full plane, well, first of all it depends on whether it passes through the z axis or not. If it doesn't, then you'd have to remember how you do in polar coordinates. I mean, basically the answer is, if you have a vertical plane, so, it doesn't depend on z. The equation does not involve z. It only involves r and theta. And, how it involves r and theta is exactly the same as when you do a line in polar coordinates in the plane. So, if it's a line passing through the origin, you say, well, theta is either some value or the other one.
If it's a line that doesn't passes to the origin, but it's more tricky. But hopefully you've seen how to do that. OK, let's move on a bit. So, one thing to know, I mean, basically, the important thing to remember is that the volume element in cylindrical coordinates, well, dx dy dz becomes r dr d theta dz. And, that shouldn't be surprising because that's just dx dy becomes r dr d theta. And, dz remains dz. I mean, so, the way to think about it, if you want, is that if you take a little piece of solid in space, so it has some height, delta z, and it has a base which has some area delta A, then the small volume, delta v, is equal to the area of a base times the height.
So, now, when you make the things infinitely small, you will get dV is dA times dz, and you can use whichever formula you want for area in the xy plane. OK, now in practice, you choose which order you integrate in. As you have probably seen, a favorite of mine is z first because very often you'll know what the top and bottom of your solid look like, and then you will reduce to just something in the xy plane.
But, there might be situations where it's actually easier to start first with dx dy or r dr d theta, and then save dz for last. I mean, if you seen how to, in single variable calculus, the disk and shell methods for finding volumes, that's exactly the dilemma of shells versus disks. One of them is you do z first. The other is you do z last. OK, so what are things we can do now with triple integrals? Well, we can find the volume of solids by just integrating dV. And, we've seen that. We can find the mass of a solid. OK, so if we have a density, delta, which, remember, delta is basically the mass divided by the volume.
OK, so the small mass element, maybe I should have written that as dm, the mass element, is density times dV. So now, this is the real physical density. If you are given a material, usually, the density will be in grams per cubic meter or cubic inch, or whatever. I mean, there is tons of different units. But, so then, the mass of your solid will be just the triple integral of density, dV because you just sum the mass of each little piece. And, of course, if the density is one, then it just becomes the volume. OK, now, it shouldn't be surprising to you that we can also do classics that we had seen in the plane such as the average value of a function, the center of mass, and moment of inertia.
OK, so the average value of the function f of x, y, z in the region, r, that would be f bar, would be one over the volume of the region times the triple integral of f dV. Or, if we have a density, and we want to take a weighted average -- Then we take one

over the mass where the mass is the triple integral of the density times the triple integral of f density dV. So, as particular cases, there is, again, the notion of center of mass of the solid. So, that's the point that somehow right in the middle of the solid. That's the point mass by which there is a point at which you should put point mass so that it would be equivalent from the point of view of dealing with forces and translation effects, of course, not for rotation. But, so the center of mass of a solid is just given by taking the average values of x, y, and z.
OK, so there is a special case where, so, x bar is one over the mass times triple integral of x density dV. And, same thing with y and z. And, of course, very often, you can use symmetry to not have to compute all three of them. For example, if you look at this solid that we had, well, I guess I've erased it now. But, if you remember what it looked, well, it was pretty obvious that the center of mass would be in the z axis. So, no need to waste time considering x bar and y bar.
And, in fact, you can also find z bar by symmetry between the top and bottom, and let you figure that out. Of course, symmetry only works, I should say, symmetry only works if the density is also symmetric. If I had taken my guy to be heavier at the front than at the back, then it would no longer be true that x bar would be zero. OK, next on the list is moment of inertia. Actually, in a way, moment of inertia in 3D is easier conceptually than in 2D. So, why is that? Well, because now the various flavors that we had come together in a nice way. So, the moment of inertia of an axis, sorry, with respect to an axis would be, again, given by the triple integral of the distance to the axis squared times density, times dV.
And, in particular, we have our solid. And, we might skewer it using any of the coordinate axes and then try to rotate it about one of the axes. So, we have three different possibilities, of course, the x, y, or z axis. And, so now, rotating about the z axis actually corresponds to when we were just doing things for flat objects in the xy plane. That corresponded to rotating about the origin. So, secretly, we were saying we were rotating about the point. But actually, it was just rotating about the z axis. Just I didn't want to introduce the z coordinate that we didn't actually need at the time. So --
[APPLAUSE] OK, so moment of inertia about the z axis, so, what's the distance to the z axis? Well, we've said that's exactly r. That's the cylindrical coordinate, r. So, the square of a distance is just r squared. Now, if you didn't want to do it in cylindrical coordinates then, of course, r squared is just x squared plus y squared. Square of distance from the z axis is just x squared plus y squared. Similarly, now, if you want the distance from the x axis, well, that will be y squared plus z squared.
OK, try to convince yourselves of the picture, or else just argue by symmetry: you know, if you change the positions of the axis. So, moment of inertia about the x axis is the double integral of y squared plus z squared delta dV. And moment of inertia about the y axis is the same thing, but now with x squared plus z squared. And so, now, if you try to apply these things for flat solids that are in the xy plane, so where there's no z to look at, well, you see these formulas become the old formulas that we had.
But now, they all fit together in a more symmetric way. OK, any questions about that? No? OK, so these are just formulas to remember. So, OK, let's do an example. Was there a question that I missed? No? OK, so let's find the moment of inertia about the z axis of a solid cone -- -- between z equals a times r and z equals b. So,

just to convince you that it's a cone, so, z equals a times r means the height is proportional to the distance from the z axis. So, let's look at what we get if we just do it in the plane of a blackboard. So, if I go to the right here, r is just the distance from the x axis.
The height should be proportional with proportionality factor A. So, that means I take a line with slope A. If I'm on the left, well, it's the same story except distance to the z axis is still positive. So, I get the symmetric thing. And, in fact, it doesn't matter which vertical plane I do it in. This is the same if I rotate about. See, there's no theta in here. So, it's the same in all directions. So, I claim it's a cone where the slope of the rays is A.
OK, and z equals b. Well, that just means we stop in our horizontal plane at height b. OK, so that's solid cone really just looks like this. That's our solid. OK, so it has a flat top, that circular top, and then the point is at v. The tip of it is at the origin. So, let's try to compute its moment of inertia about the z axis. So, that means maybe this is like the top that you are going to spin. And, it tells you how hard it is to actually spin that top. Actually, that's also useful if you're going to do mechanical engineering because if you are trying to design gears, and things like that that will rotate, you might want to know exactly how much effort you'll have to put to actually get them to spin, and whether you're actually going to have a strong enough engine, or whatever, to do it.
OK, so what's the moment of inertia of this guy? Well, that's the triple integral of, well, we have to choose x squared plus y squared or r squared. Let's see, I think I want to use cylindrical coordinates to do that, given the shape. So, we use r squared. I might have a density that let's say the density is one. So, I don't have density. I still have dV. Now, it will be my choice to choose between doing the dz first or doing r dr d theta first. Just to show you how it goes the other way around, let me do it r dr d theta dz this time. Then you can decide on a case-by-case basis which one you like best. OK, so if we do it in this direction, it means that in the inner and middle integrals, we've fixed a value of z.
And, for that particular value of z, we'll be actually slicing our solid by a horizontal plane, and looking at what we get, OK? So, what does that look like? Well, I fixed a value of z, and I slice my solid by a horizontal plane. Well, I'm going to get a circle certainly. What's the radius, well, a disk actually, what's the radius of the disk? Yeah, the radius of the disk should be z over a because the equation of that cone, we said it's z equals ar. So, if you flip it around, so, maybe I should switch to another blackboard. So, the equation of a cone is z equals ar, or equivalently r equals z over a.
So, for a given value of z, I will get, this guy will be a disk of radius z over a. OK, so, moment of inertia is going to be, well, we said r squared, r dr d theta dz. Now, so, to set up the inner and middle integrals, I just set up a double integral over this disk of radius z over a. So, it's easy. r goes from zero to z over a. Theta goes from zero to 2pi. OK, and then, well, if I set up the bounds for z, now it's my outer variable. So, the question I have to ask is what is the first slice? What is the last slice? So, the bottommost value of z would be zero, and the topmost would be b.
And so, that's it I get. So, exercise, it's not very hard. Try to set it up the other way around with dz first and then r dr d theta. It's pretty much the same level of difficulty. I'm sure you can do both of them. So, and also, if you want to practice

calculations, you should end up getting pi b to the five over 10a to the four if I got it right. OK, let me finish with one more example. I'm trying to give you plenty of practice because in case you haven't noticed, Monday is a holiday. So, you don't have recitation on Monday, which is good. But it means that there will be lots of stuff to cover on Wednesday. So --
Thank you. OK, so third example, let's say that I want to just set up a triple integral for the region where z is bigger than one minus y inside the unit ball centered at the origin. So, the unit ball is just, you know, well, stay inside of the unit sphere. So, its equation, if you want, would be x squared plus y squared plus z squared less than one. OK, so that's one thing you should remember. The equation of a sphere centered at the origin is x squared plus y squared plus z squared equals radius squared. And now, we are going to take this plane, z equals one minus y.
So, if you think about it, it's parallel to the x axis because there's no x in its coordinate in its equation. At the origin, the height is one. So, it starts right here at one. And, it slopes down with y with slope one. OK, so it's a plane that comes straight out here, and it intersects the sphere, so here and here, but also at other points in between. Any idea what kind of shape this is? Well, it's an ellipse, but it's even more than that. It's also a circle. If you slice a sphere by a plane, you always get a circle. But, of course, it's a slanted circle. So, if you look at it in the xy plane, if you project it to the xy plane, that you will get an ellipse. OK, so we want to look at this guy in here.
So, how do we do that? Well, so maybe I should actually draw quickly a picture. So, in the yz plane, it looks just like this, OK? But, if I look at it from above in the xy plane, then its shadow, well, see, it will sit entirely where y is positive. So, it sits entirely above here, and it goes through here and here. And, in fact, when you project that slanted circle, now you will get an ellipse.
And, well, I don't really know how to draw it well, but it should be something like this. OK, so now if you want to try to set up that double integral, sorry, the triple integral, well, so let's say we do it in rectangular coordinates because we are really evil. [LAUGHTER] So then, the bottom surface, OK, so we do it with z first. So, the bottom surface is the slanted plane. So, the bottom value would be z equals one minus y. The top value is on the sphere. So, the sphere corresponds to z equals square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you'd go from the plane to the sphere. And then, to find the bounds for x and y, you have to figure out what exactly, what the heck is this region here?
So, what is this region? Well, we have to figure out, for what values of x and y the plane is below the ellipse. So, the condition is that, sorry, the plane is below the sphere. OK, so, that's when the plane is below the sphere. That means one minus y is less than square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you have to somehow manipulate this to extract something simpler. Well, probably the only way to do it is to square both sides, one minus y squared should be less than one minus x squared minus y squared. And, if you work hard enough, you'll find quite an ugly equation. But, you can figure out what are, then, the bounds for x given y, and then set up the integral? So, just to give you a hint, the bounds on y will be zero to one.
The bounds on x, well, I'm not sure you want to see them, but in case you do, it will be from negative square root of 2y minus 2y squared to square root of 2y minus 2y squared. So, exercise, figure out how I got these by starting from that. Now, of

course, if we just wanted the volume of this guy, we wouldn't do it this way. We do symmetry, and actually we'd rotate the thing so that our spherical cap was actually centered on the z axis because that would be a much easier way to set it up. But, depending on what function we are integrating, we can't always do that.
OK, so have a nice, long weekend, and I'll see you on Tuesday.

So, it shouldn't be surprising that we will start today with triple integrals. OK, so the way triple integrals work is if I give you a function of three variables, x, y, z, and I give you some region in space, so, some solid, then I can take the integral over this region over function f dV where dV stands for the volume element. OK, so what it means is we will just take every single little piece of our solid, take the value of f there, multiply by the small volume of each little piece, and sum all these things together.
And, so this volume element here, well, for example, if you are doing the integral in rectangular coordinates, that will become dx dy dz or any permutation of that because, of course, we have lots of possible orders of integration to choose from. So, rather than bore you with theory and all sorts of complicated things, let's just do examples. And, you will see, basically, if you understand how to set up iterated integrals into variables, that you basically understand how to do them in three variables. You just have to be a bit more careful. And, there's one more step. OK, so let's take our first triple integral to be on the region.
 
So, of course, there's two different things as always. There is the region of integration and there's the function we are integrating. Now, the function we are integrating, well, it will come in handy when you actually try to evaluate the integral. But, as you can see, probably, the new part is really hard to set it up. So, the function won't really matter that much for me. So, in the examples I'll do today, functions will be kind of silly. So, for example, let's say that we want to look at the region between two paraboloids, one given by z = x ^2 y ^2.
The other is z = 4 - x ^2 - y ^2. And, so, I haven't given you, yet, the function to integrate. OK, this is not the function to integrate. This is what describes the region where I will integrate my function. And, let's say that I just want to find the volume of this region, which is the triple integral of just one dV. OK, similarly, remember, when we try to find the area of the region in the plane, we are just integrating one dA. Here we integrate one dV. that will give us the volume. Now, I know that you can imagine how to actually do this one as a double integral. But, the goal of the game is to set up the triple integral. It's not actually to find the volume.
So, what does that look like? Well, z = x ^2 y ^2, that's one of our favorite paraboloids. That's something that looks like a parabola with its bottom at the origin that you spin about the z axis. And, z equals four minus x squared minus y squared, well, that's also a paraboloid. But, this one is pointing down, and when you take x equals y equals zero, you get z equals four. So, it starts at four, and it goes down like that. OK, so the solid that we'd like to consider is what's in between in here. So, it has a curvy top which is this downward paraboloid, a curvy bottom which is the other paraboloid.
And, what about the sides? Well, do you have any idea what we get here? Yeah, it's going to be a circle because entire picture is invariant by rotation about the z axis. So, if you look at the picture just, say, in the yz plane, you get this point and that point. And, when you rotate everything around the z axis, you will just get a circle here. OK, so our goal is to find the volume of this thing, and there's lots of things I could do to simplify the calculation, or even not do it as a triple integral at all.
But, I want to actually set it up as a triple integral just to show how we do that. OK, so the first thing we need to do is choose an order of integration. And, here, well, I don't know if you can see it yet, but hopefully soon that will be intuitive to you. I claim that I would like to start by integrating first over z. What's the reason for that? Well, the reason is if I give you x and y, then you can find quickly, what's the bottom and top values of z for that choice of x and y? OK, so if I have x and y given, then I can find above that: what is the bottom z and the top z corresponding to the vertical line above that point? The portion of it that's inside our solid, so somehow, there's a bottom z and a top z.
And, so the top z is actually on the downward paraboloid. So, it's four minus x squared minus y squared. The bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared. OK, so if I want to start to set this up, I will write the triple integral. And then, so let's say I'm going to do it dz first, and then, say, dy dx. It doesn't really matter. So then, for a given value of x and y, I claim z goes from the bottom surface. The bottom face is z equals x squared plus y squared. The top face is four minus x squared minus y squared. OK, is that OK with everyone? Yeah?
Any questions so far? Yes? Why did I start with z? That's a very good question. So, I can choose whatever order I want, but let's say I did x first . Then, to find the inner

integral bounds, I would need to say, OK, I've chosen values of, see, in the inner integral, you've fixed the two other variables, and you're just going to vary that one. And, you need to find bounds for it. So, if I integrate over x first, I have to solve, answer the following question.
Say I'm given values of y and z. What are the bounds for x? So, that would mean I'm slicing my solid by lines that are parallel to the x axis. And, see, it's kind of hard to find, what are the values of x at the front and at the back? I mean, it's possible, but it's easier to actually first look for z at the top and bottom. Yes? dy dx, or dx dy? No, it's completely at random. I mean, you can see x and y play symmetric roles. So, if you look at it, it's reasonably clear that z should be the easiest one to set up first for what comes next. xy or yx, it's the same. Yes? Yes, it will be easier to use cylindrical coordinates. I'll get to that just as soon as I'm done with this one. OK, so let's continue a bit with that. And, as you mentioned, actually we don't actually want to do it with xy in the end.
In a few minutes, we will actually switch to cylindrical coordinates. But, for now, we don't even know what they are. OK, so I've done the inner integral by looking at, you know, if I slice by vertical lines, what is the top? What is the bottom for a given value of x and y? So, the bounds in the inner integral depend on both the middle and outer variables. Next, I need to figure out what values of x and y I will be interested in. And, the answer for that is, well, the values of x and y that I want to look at are all those that are in the shade of my region. So, in fact, to set up the middle and outer bounds, what I want to do is project my solid. So, my solid looks like this kind of thing.
And, I don't really know how to call it. But, what's interesting now is I want to look at the shadow that it casts in the xy plane. OK, and, of course, that shadow will just be the disk that's directly below this disk here that's separating the two halves of the solid. And so, now I will want to integrate over, I want to look at all the xy's, x and y, in the shadow. So, now I'm left with, actually, something we've already done, namely setting up a double integral over x and y. So, if it helps, here, we don't strictly need it, but if it helps, it could be useful to actually draw a picture of this shadow in the xy plane.
So, here it would just look, again, like a disk, and set it up. Now, the question is, how do we find the size of this disk, the size of the shadow? Well, basically we have to figure out where our two paraboloids intersect. There's nothing else. OK, so, one way how to find the shadow in the xy plane -- -- well, here we actually know the answer a priori, but even if we didn't, we could just say, well, our region lives wherever the bottom surface is below the top surface, OK, so we want to look at things wherever bottom value of z is less than the top value of z, I mean, less or less than or equal, that's the same thing.
So, if the bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared should be less than four minus x squared minus y squared, and if you solve for that, then you will get, well, so let's move these guys over here. You'll get two x squared plus two y squared less than four. That becomes x squared plus y squared less than two. So, that means that's a disk of radius square root of two, OK? So, we kind of knew in advance it was going to be a disk, but what we've learned now is that this radius is square root of two.

So, if we want to set up, if we really want to set it up using dy dx like they started, then we can do it because we know, so, for the middle integral, now, we want to fix a value of x. And, for that fixed value of x, we want to figure out the bounds for y. Well, the answer is y goes from here to here. What's here? Well, here, y is square root of two minus x squared. And, here it's negative square root of two minus x squared.
So, y will go from negative square root of two minus x squared to positive square root. And then, x will go from negative root two to root two. OK, if that's not completely clear to you, then I encourage you to go over how we set up double integrals again. OK, does that make sense, kind of? Yeah? Well, so, when we set up, remember, we are setting up a double integral, dy dx here. So, when we do it dy dx, it means we slice this region of a plane by vertical line segments. So, this middle guy would be what used to be the inner integral. So, in the inner, remember, you fix the value of x, and you ask yourself, what is the range of values of y in my region? So, y goes from here to here, and what here and here are depends on the value of x.
How? Well, we have to find the relation between x and y at these points. These points are on the circle of radius root two. So, if you want this circle maybe I should have written, is x squared plus y squared equals two. And, if you solve for y, given x, you get plus minus root of two minus x squared, OK? Yes? Is there a way to compute this with symmetry? Well, certainly, yeah, this solid looks sufficiently symmetric, but actually you could certainly, if you don't want to do the whole disk, you could just do quarter disks, and multiply by four. You could even just look at the lower half of the solid, and multiply them by two, so, total by eight.
So, yeah, certainly there's lots of ways to make it slightly easier by using symmetry. Now, the most spectacular way to use symmetry here, of course, is to use that we have this rotation symmetry and switch, actually, not do this guy in xy coordinates but instead in polar coordinates. So -- So, the smarter thing to do would be to use polar coordinates instead of x and y. Of course, we want to keep z. I mean, we are very happy with z the way it is. But, we'll just change x and y to R cos theta, R sine theta, OK, because, well, let's see actually how we would evaluate this guy.
So, well actually, let's not. It's kind of boring. So, let me just point out one small thing here, sorry, before I do that. So, if you start computing the inner integral, OK, so let me not do that yet, sorry, so if you try to compute the inner integral, you'll be integrating from x squared plus y squared to four minus x squared minus y squared dz. Well, that will integrate to z between these two bounds. So, you will get four minus two x squared minus two y squared. Now, when you put that into the remaining ones, you'll get something that's probably not very pleasant of four minus two x squared minus two y squared dy dx.
And here, you see that to evaluate this, you would switch to polar coordinates. Oh, by the way, so if your initial instincts had been to, given that you just want the volume, you could also have found the volume just by doing a double integral of the height between the top and bottom. Well, you would just have gotten this, right, because this is the height between top and bottom. So, it's all the same. It doesn't really matter. But with this, of course, we will be able to integrate all sorts of functions, not just one over the solid. So, we will be able to do much more than just volumes. OK, so let's see, how do we do it with polar coordinates instead? Well, so --

Well, that would become, so let's see. So, I want to keep dz. But then, dx dy or dy dx would become r dr d theta. And, if I try to set up the bounds, well, I probably shouldn't keep this x squared plus y squared around. But, x squared plus y squared is easy in terms of r and theta. That's just r squared. OK, I mean, in general I could have something that depends also on theta. That's perfectly legitimate. But here, it simplifies, and this guy up here, four minus x squared minus y squared becomes four minus r squared.
And now, the integral that we have to do over r and theta, well, we look again at the shadow. The shadow is still a disk of radius root two. That hasn't changed. And now, we know how to set up this integral in polar coordinates. r goes from zero to root two, and theta goes from zero to two pi. OK, and now it becomes actually easier to evaluate. OK, so now we have actually a name for this because we're doing it in space. So, these are called, actually, cylindrical coordinates. So, in fact, you already knew about cylindrical coordinates even if you did not know the name.
OK, so the idea of cylindrical coordinates is that instead of x, y, and z, to locate a point in space, you will use three coordinates. One of them is basically how high it is above the xy plane. So, that will be z. And then, you will use polar coordinates for the projection of your point on the xy plane. So, r will be the distance from the z axis. And theta will be the angle from the x axis counterclockwise. So, the one thing to be careful about is because of the usual convention, that we make the x axis point toward us. Theta equals zero is no longer to the right. Now, theta equals zero is to the front, and the angel is measured from the front counterclockwise.
OK, so, and of course, if you want to know how to convert between x, y, z and r theta z, well, the formulas are just the same as in usual polar coordinates. R cos theta, r sine theta, and z remain z. OK, so why are these called cylindrical coordinates, by the way? Well, let's say that I gave you the equation r equals a, where a is some constant. Say r equals one, for example. So, r equals one in 2D, that used to be just a circle of radius one. Now, in space, a single equation actually defines a surface, not just a curve anymore. And, the set of points where r is a, well, that's all the points that are distance a from the z axis. So, in fact, what you get this way is a cylinder of radius a centered on the z axis.
OK, so that's why they are called cylindrical coordinates. By the way, so now, similarly, if you look at the equation theta equals some given value, well, so that used to be just a ray from the origin. Now, that becomes a vertical half plane. For example, if I set the value of theta and let r and z vary, well, r is always positive, but basically that means I am taking a vertical plane that comes out in this direction.
OK, any questions about cylindrical coordinates? Yes? Yeah, so I'm saying when you fix theta, you get only a half plane, not a full plane. I mean, it goes all the way up and down, but it doesn't go back to the other side of the z axis. Why? That's because r is always positive by convention. So, for example, here, we say theta is zero. At the back, we say theta is pi. We don't say theta is zero and r is negative. We say r is positive and theta is pi. It's a convention, largely. But, sticking with this convention really will help you to set up the integrals properly. I mean, otherwise there is just too much risk for mistakes. Yes?
Well, so the question is if I were to use symmetry to do this one, would I multiply by four or by two? Well, it depends on how much symmetry you are using. So, I mean, it's your choice. You can multiply by two, by four, by eight depending on how much

you cut it. So, it depends on what symmetry you use, if you use symmetry between top and bottom you'd say, well, the volume is twice the lower half. If you use the left and right half, you would say it's twice each half. If you cut it into four pieces, and so on.
So, and again, you don't have to use the symmetry. If you don't think of using polar coordinates, then it can save you from doing, you know, you can just start at zero here and here, and simplify things a tiny bit. But, OK, yes? So, to define a vertical full plane, well, first of all it depends on whether it passes through the z axis or not. If it doesn't, then you'd have to remember how you do in polar coordinates. I mean, basically the answer is, if you have a vertical plane, so, it doesn't depend on z. The equation does not involve z. It only involves r and theta. And, how it involves r and theta is exactly the same as when you do a line in polar coordinates in the plane. So, if it's a line passing through the origin, you say, well, theta is either some value or the other one.
If it's a line that doesn't passes to the origin, but it's more tricky. But hopefully you've seen how to do that. OK, let's move on a bit. So, one thing to know, I mean, basically, the important thing to remember is that the volume element in cylindrical coordinates, well, dx dy dz becomes r dr d theta dz. And, that shouldn't be surprising because that's just dx dy becomes r dr d theta. And, dz remains dz. I mean, so, the way to think about it, if you want, is that if you take a little piece of solid in space, so it has some height, delta z, and it has a base which has some area delta A, then the small volume, delta v, is equal to the area of a base times the height.
So, now, when you make the things infinitely small, you will get dV is dA times dz, and you can use whichever formula you want for area in the xy plane. OK, now in practice, you choose which order you integrate in. As you have probably seen, a favorite of mine is z first because very often you'll know what the top and bottom of your solid look like, and then you will reduce to just something in the xy plane.
But, there might be situations where it's actually easier to start first with dx dy or r dr d theta, and then save dz for last. I mean, if you seen how to, in single variable calculus, the disk and shell methods for finding volumes, that's exactly the dilemma of shells versus disks. One of them is you do z first. The other is you do z last. OK, so what are things we can do now with triple integrals? Well, we can find the volume of solids by just integrating dV. And, we've seen that. We can find the mass of a solid. OK, so if we have a density, delta, which, remember, delta is basically the mass divided by the volume.
OK, so the small mass element, maybe I should have written that as dm, the mass element, is density times dV. So now, this is the real physical density. If you are given a material, usually, the density will be in grams per cubic meter or cubic inch, or whatever. I mean, there is tons of different units. But, so then, the mass of your solid will be just the triple integral of density, dV because you just sum the mass of each little piece. And, of course, if the density is one, then it just becomes the volume. OK, now, it shouldn't be surprising to you that we can also do classics that we had seen in the plane such as the average value of a function, the center of mass, and moment of inertia.
OK, so the average value of the function f of x, y, z in the region, r, that would be f bar, would be one over the volume of the region times the triple integral of f dV. Or, if we have a density, and we want to take a weighted average -- Then we take one

over the mass where the mass is the triple integral of the density times the triple integral of f density dV. So, as particular cases, there is, again, the notion of center of mass of the solid. So, that's the point that somehow right in the middle of the solid. That's the point mass by which there is a point at which you should put point mass so that it would be equivalent from the point of view of dealing with forces and translation effects, of course, not for rotation. But, so the center of mass of a solid is just given by taking the average values of x, y, and z.
OK, so there is a special case where, so, x bar is one over the mass times triple integral of x density dV. And, same thing with y and z. And, of course, very often, you can use symmetry to not have to compute all three of them. For example, if you look at this solid that we had, well, I guess I've erased it now. But, if you remember what it looked, well, it was pretty obvious that the center of mass would be in the z axis. So, no need to waste time considering x bar and y bar.
And, in fact, you can also find z bar by symmetry between the top and bottom, and let you figure that out. Of course, symmetry only works, I should say, symmetry only works if the density is also symmetric. If I had taken my guy to be heavier at the front than at the back, then it would no longer be true that x bar would be zero. OK, next on the list is moment of inertia. Actually, in a way, moment of inertia in 3D is easier conceptually than in 2D. So, why is that? Well, because now the various flavors that we had come together in a nice way. So, the moment of inertia of an axis, sorry, with respect to an axis would be, again, given by the triple integral of the distance to the axis squared times density, times dV.
And, in particular, we have our solid. And, we might skewer it using any of the coordinate axes and then try to rotate it about one of the axes. So, we have three different possibilities, of course, the x, y, or z axis. And, so now, rotating about the z axis actually corresponds to when we were just doing things for flat objects in the xy plane. That corresponded to rotating about the origin. So, secretly, we were saying we were rotating about the point. But actually, it was just rotating about the z axis. Just I didn't want to introduce the z coordinate that we didn't actually need at the time. So --
[APPLAUSE] OK, so moment of inertia about the z axis, so, what's the distance to the z axis? Well, we've said that's exactly r. That's the cylindrical coordinate, r. So, the square of a distance is just r squared. Now, if you didn't want to do it in cylindrical coordinates then, of course, r squared is just x squared plus y squared. Square of distance from the z axis is just x squared plus y squared. Similarly, now, if you want the distance from the x axis, well, that will be y squared plus z squared.
OK, try to convince yourselves of the picture, or else just argue by symmetry: you know, if you change the positions of the axis. So, moment of inertia about the x axis is the double integral of y squared plus z squared delta dV. And moment of inertia about the y axis is the same thing, but now with x squared plus z squared. And so, now, if you try to apply these things for flat solids that are in the xy plane, so where there's no z to look at, well, you see these formulas become the old formulas that we had.
But now, they all fit together in a more symmetric way. OK, any questions about that? No? OK, so these are just formulas to remember. So, OK, let's do an example. Was there a question that I missed? No? OK, so let's find the moment of inertia about the z axis of a solid cone -- -- between z equals a times r and z equals b. So,

just to convince you that it's a cone, so, z equals a times r means the height is proportional to the distance from the z axis. So, let's look at what we get if we just do it in the plane of a blackboard. So, if I go to the right here, r is just the distance from the x axis.
The height should be proportional with proportionality factor A. So, that means I take a line with slope A. If I'm on the left, well, it's the same story except distance to the z axis is still positive. So, I get the symmetric thing. And, in fact, it doesn't matter which vertical plane I do it in. This is the same if I rotate about. See, there's no theta in here. So, it's the same in all directions. So, I claim it's a cone where the slope of the rays is A.
OK, and z equals b. Well, that just means we stop in our horizontal plane at height b. OK, so that's solid cone really just looks like this. That's our solid. OK, so it has a flat top, that circular top, and then the point is at v. The tip of it is at the origin. So, let's try to compute its moment of inertia about the z axis. So, that means maybe this is like the top that you are going to spin. And, it tells you how hard it is to actually spin that top. Actually, that's also useful if you're going to do mechanical engineering because if you are trying to design gears, and things like that that will rotate, you might want to know exactly how much effort you'll have to put to actually get them to spin, and whether you're actually going to have a strong enough engine, or whatever, to do it.
OK, so what's the moment of inertia of this guy? Well, that's the triple integral of, well, we have to choose x squared plus y squared or r squared. Let's see, I think I want to use cylindrical coordinates to do that, given the shape. So, we use r squared. I might have a density that let's say the density is one. So, I don't have density. I still have dV. Now, it will be my choice to choose between doing the dz first or doing r dr d theta first. Just to show you how it goes the other way around, let me do it r dr d theta dz this time. Then you can decide on a case-by-case basis which one you like best. OK, so if we do it in this direction, it means that in the inner and middle integrals, we've fixed a value of z.
And, for that particular value of z, we'll be actually slicing our solid by a horizontal plane, and looking at what we get, OK? So, what does that look like? Well, I fixed a value of z, and I slice my solid by a horizontal plane. Well, I'm going to get a circle certainly. What's the radius, well, a disk actually, what's the radius of the disk? Yeah, the radius of the disk should be z over a because the equation of that cone, we said it's z equals ar. So, if you flip it around, so, maybe I should switch to another blackboard. So, the equation of a cone is z equals ar, or equivalently r equals z over a.
So, for a given value of z, I will get, this guy will be a disk of radius z over a. OK, so, moment of inertia is going to be, well, we said r squared, r dr d theta dz. Now, so, to set up the inner and middle integrals, I just set up a double integral over this disk of radius z over a. So, it's easy. r goes from zero to z over a. Theta goes from zero to 2pi. OK, and then, well, if I set up the bounds for z, now it's my outer variable. So, the question I have to ask is what is the first slice? What is the last slice? So, the bottommost value of z would be zero, and the topmost would be b.
And so, that's it I get. So, exercise, it's not very hard. Try to set it up the other way around with dz first and then r dr d theta. It's pretty much the same level of difficulty. I'm sure you can do both of them. So, and also, if you want to practice

calculations, you should end up getting pi b to the five over 10a to the four if I got it right. OK, let me finish with one more example. I'm trying to give you plenty of practice because in case you haven't noticed, Monday is a holiday. So, you don't have recitation on Monday, which is good. But it means that there will be lots of stuff to cover on Wednesday. So --
Thank you. OK, so third example, let's say that I want to just set up a triple integral for the region where z is bigger than one minus y inside the unit ball centered at the origin. So, the unit ball is just, you know, well, stay inside of the unit sphere. So, its equation, if you want, would be x squared plus y squared plus z squared less than one. OK, so that's one thing you should remember. The equation of a sphere centered at the origin is x squared plus y squared plus z squared equals radius squared. And now, we are going to take this plane, z equals one minus y.
So, if you think about it, it's parallel to the x axis because there's no x in its coordinate in its equation. At the origin, the height is one. So, it starts right here at one. And, it slopes down with y with slope one. OK, so it's a plane that comes straight out here, and it intersects the sphere, so here and here, but also at other points in between. Any idea what kind of shape this is? Well, it's an ellipse, but it's even more than that. It's also a circle. If you slice a sphere by a plane, you always get a circle. But, of course, it's a slanted circle. So, if you look at it in the xy plane, if you project it to the xy plane, that you will get an ellipse. OK, so we want to look at this guy in here.
So, how do we do that? Well, so maybe I should actually draw quickly a picture. So, in the yz plane, it looks just like this, OK? But, if I look at it from above in the xy plane, then its shadow, well, see, it will sit entirely where y is positive. So, it sits entirely above here, and it goes through here and here. And, in fact, when you project that slanted circle, now you will get an ellipse.
And, well, I don't really know how to draw it well, but it should be something like this. OK, so now if you want to try to set up that double integral, sorry, the triple integral, well, so let's say we do it in rectangular coordinates because we are really evil. [LAUGHTER] So then, the bottom surface, OK, so we do it with z first. So, the bottom surface is the slanted plane. So, the bottom value would be z equals one minus y. The top value is on the sphere. So, the sphere corresponds to z equals square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you'd go from the plane to the sphere. And then, to find the bounds for x and y, you have to figure out what exactly, what the heck is this region here?
So, what is this region? Well, we have to figure out, for what values of x and y the plane is below the ellipse. So, the condition is that, sorry, the plane is below the sphere. OK, so, that's when the plane is below the sphere. That means one minus y is less than square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you have to somehow manipulate this to extract something simpler. Well, probably the only way to do it is to square both sides, one minus y squared should be less than one minus x squared minus y squared. And, if you work hard enough, you'll find quite an ugly equation. But, you can figure out what are, then, the bounds for x given y, and then set up the integral? So, just to give you a hint, the bounds on y will be zero to one.
The bounds on x, well, I'm not sure you want to see them, but in case you do, it will be from negative square root of 2y minus 2y squared to square root of 2y minus 2y squared. So, exercise, figure out how I got these by starting from that. Now, of

course, if we just wanted the volume of this guy, we wouldn't do it this way. We do symmetry, and actually we'd rotate the thing so that our spherical cap was actually centered on the z axis because that would be a much easier way to set it up. But, depending on what function we are integrating, we can't always do that.
OK, so have a nice, long weekend, and I'll see you on Tuesday.

So, it shouldn't be surprising that we will start today with triple integrals. OK, so the way triple integrals work is if I give you a function of three variables, x, y, z, and I give you some region in space, so, some solid, then I can take the integral over this region over function f dV where dV stands for the volume element. OK, so what it means is we will just take every single little piece of our solid, take the value of f there, multiply by the small volume of each little piece, and sum all these things together.
And, so this volume element here, well, for example, if you are doing the integral in rectangular coordinates, that will become dx dy dz or any permutation of that because, of course, we have lots of possible orders of integration to choose from. So, rather than bore you with theory and all sorts of complicated things, let's just do examples. And, you will see, basically, if you understand how to set up iterated integrals into variables, that you basically understand how to do them in three variables. You just have to be a bit more careful. And, there's one more step. OK, so let's take our first triple integral to be on the region.
 
So, of course, there's two different things as always. There is the region of integration and there's the function we are integrating. Now, the function we are integrating, well, it will come in handy when you actually try to evaluate the integral. But, as you can see, probably, the new part is really hard to set it up. So, the function won't really matter that much for me. So, in the examples I'll do today, functions will be kind of silly. So, for example, let's say that we want to look at the region between two paraboloids, one given by z = x ^2 y ^2.
The other is z = 4 - x ^2 - y ^2. And, so, I haven't given you, yet, the function to integrate. OK, this is not the function to integrate. This is what describes the region where I will integrate my function. And, let's say that I just want to find the volume of this region, which is the triple integral of just one dV. OK, similarly, remember, when we try to find the area of the region in the plane, we are just integrating one dA. Here we integrate one dV. that will give us the volume. Now, I know that you can imagine how to actually do this one as a double integral. But, the goal of the game is to set up the triple integral. It's not actually to find the volume.
So, what does that look like? Well, z = x ^2 y ^2, that's one of our favorite paraboloids. That's something that looks like a parabola with its bottom at the origin that you spin about the z axis. And, z equals four minus x squared minus y squared, well, that's also a paraboloid. But, this one is pointing down, and when you take x equals y equals zero, you get z equals four. So, it starts at four, and it goes down like that. OK, so the solid that we'd like to consider is what's in between in here. So, it has a curvy top which is this downward paraboloid, a curvy bottom which is the other paraboloid.
And, what about the sides? Well, do you have any idea what we get here? Yeah, it's going to be a circle because entire picture is invariant by rotation about the z axis. So, if you look at the picture just, say, in the yz plane, you get this point and that point. And, when you rotate everything around the z axis, you will just get a circle here. OK, so our goal is to find the volume of this thing, and there's lots of things I could do to simplify the calculation, or even not do it as a triple integral at all.
But, I want to actually set it up as a triple integral just to show how we do that. OK, so the first thing we need to do is choose an order of integration. And, here, well, I don't know if you can see it yet, but hopefully soon that will be intuitive to you. I claim that I would like to start by integrating first over z. What's the reason for that? Well, the reason is if I give you x and y, then you can find quickly, what's the bottom and top values of z for that choice of x and y? OK, so if I have x and y given, then I can find above that: what is the bottom z and the top z corresponding to the vertical line above that point? The portion of it that's inside our solid, so somehow, there's a bottom z and a top z.
And, so the top z is actually on the downward paraboloid. So, it's four minus x squared minus y squared. The bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared. OK, so if I want to start to set this up, I will write the triple integral. And then, so let's say I'm going to do it dz first, and then, say, dy dx. It doesn't really matter. So then, for a given value of x and y, I claim z goes from the bottom surface. The bottom face is z equals x squared plus y squared. The top face is four minus x squared minus y squared. OK, is that OK with everyone? Yeah?
Any questions so far? Yes? Why did I start with z? That's a very good question. So, I can choose whatever order I want, but let's say I did x first . Then, to find the inner

integral bounds, I would need to say, OK, I've chosen values of, see, in the inner integral, you've fixed the two other variables, and you're just going to vary that one. And, you need to find bounds for it. So, if I integrate over x first, I have to solve, answer the following question.
Say I'm given values of y and z. What are the bounds for x? So, that would mean I'm slicing my solid by lines that are parallel to the x axis. And, see, it's kind of hard to find, what are the values of x at the front and at the back? I mean, it's possible, but it's easier to actually first look for z at the top and bottom. Yes? dy dx, or dx dy? No, it's completely at random. I mean, you can see x and y play symmetric roles. So, if you look at it, it's reasonably clear that z should be the easiest one to set up first for what comes next. xy or yx, it's the same. Yes? Yes, it will be easier to use cylindrical coordinates. I'll get to that just as soon as I'm done with this one. OK, so let's continue a bit with that. And, as you mentioned, actually we don't actually want to do it with xy in the end.
In a few minutes, we will actually switch to cylindrical coordinates. But, for now, we don't even know what they are. OK, so I've done the inner integral by looking at, you know, if I slice by vertical lines, what is the top? What is the bottom for a given value of x and y? So, the bounds in the inner integral depend on both the middle and outer variables. Next, I need to figure out what values of x and y I will be interested in. And, the answer for that is, well, the values of x and y that I want to look at are all those that are in the shade of my region. So, in fact, to set up the middle and outer bounds, what I want to do is project my solid. So, my solid looks like this kind of thing.
And, I don't really know how to call it. But, what's interesting now is I want to look at the shadow that it casts in the xy plane. OK, and, of course, that shadow will just be the disk that's directly below this disk here that's separating the two halves of the solid. And so, now I will want to integrate over, I want to look at all the xy's, x and y, in the shadow. So, now I'm left with, actually, something we've already done, namely setting up a double integral over x and y. So, if it helps, here, we don't strictly need it, but if it helps, it could be useful to actually draw a picture of this shadow in the xy plane.
So, here it would just look, again, like a disk, and set it up. Now, the question is, how do we find the size of this disk, the size of the shadow? Well, basically we have to figure out where our two paraboloids intersect. There's nothing else. OK, so, one way how to find the shadow in the xy plane -- -- well, here we actually know the answer a priori, but even if we didn't, we could just say, well, our region lives wherever the bottom surface is below the top surface, OK, so we want to look at things wherever bottom value of z is less than the top value of z, I mean, less or less than or equal, that's the same thing.
So, if the bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared should be less than four minus x squared minus y squared, and if you solve for that, then you will get, well, so let's move these guys over here. You'll get two x squared plus two y squared less than four. That becomes x squared plus y squared less than two. So, that means that's a disk of radius square root of two, OK? So, we kind of knew in advance it was going to be a disk, but what we've learned now is that this radius is square root of two.

So, if we want to set up, if we really want to set it up using dy dx like they started, then we can do it because we know, so, for the middle integral, now, we want to fix a value of x. And, for that fixed value of x, we want to figure out the bounds for y. Well, the answer is y goes from here to here. What's here? Well, here, y is square root of two minus x squared. And, here it's negative square root of two minus x squared.
So, y will go from negative square root of two minus x squared to positive square root. And then, x will go from negative root two to root two. OK, if that's not completely clear to you, then I encourage you to go over how we set up double integrals again. OK, does that make sense, kind of? Yeah? Well, so, when we set up, remember, we are setting up a double integral, dy dx here. So, when we do it dy dx, it means we slice this region of a plane by vertical line segments. So, this middle guy would be what used to be the inner integral. So, in the inner, remember, you fix the value of x, and you ask yourself, what is the range of values of y in my region? So, y goes from here to here, and what here and here are depends on the value of x.
How? Well, we have to find the relation between x and y at these points. These points are on the circle of radius root two. So, if you want this circle maybe I should have written, is x squared plus y squared equals two. And, if you solve for y, given x, you get plus minus root of two minus x squared, OK? Yes? Is there a way to compute this with symmetry? Well, certainly, yeah, this solid looks sufficiently symmetric, but actually you could certainly, if you don't want to do the whole disk, you could just do quarter disks, and multiply by four. You could even just look at the lower half of the solid, and multiply them by two, so, total by eight.
So, yeah, certainly there's lots of ways to make it slightly easier by using symmetry. Now, the most spectacular way to use symmetry here, of course, is to use that we have this rotation symmetry and switch, actually, not do this guy in xy coordinates but instead in polar coordinates. So -- So, the smarter thing to do would be to use polar coordinates instead of x and y. Of course, we want to keep z. I mean, we are very happy with z the way it is. But, we'll just change x and y to R cos theta, R sine theta, OK, because, well, let's see actually how we would evaluate this guy.
So, well actually, let's not. It's kind of boring. So, let me just point out one small thing here, sorry, before I do that. So, if you start computing the inner integral, OK, so let me not do that yet, sorry, so if you try to compute the inner integral, you'll be integrating from x squared plus y squared to four minus x squared minus y squared dz. Well, that will integrate to z between these two bounds. So, you will get four minus two x squared minus two y squared. Now, when you put that into the remaining ones, you'll get something that's probably not very pleasant of four minus two x squared minus two y squared dy dx.
And here, you see that to evaluate this, you would switch to polar coordinates. Oh, by the way, so if your initial instincts had been to, given that you just want the volume, you could also have found the volume just by doing a double integral of the height between the top and bottom. Well, you would just have gotten this, right, because this is the height between top and bottom. So, it's all the same. It doesn't really matter. But with this, of course, we will be able to integrate all sorts of functions, not just one over the solid. So, we will be able to do much more than just volumes. OK, so let's see, how do we do it with polar coordinates instead? Well, so --

Well, that would become, so let's see. So, I want to keep dz. But then, dx dy or dy dx would become r dr d theta. And, if I try to set up the bounds, well, I probably shouldn't keep this x squared plus y squared around. But, x squared plus y squared is easy in terms of r and theta. That's just r squared. OK, I mean, in general I could have something that depends also on theta. That's perfectly legitimate. But here, it simplifies, and this guy up here, four minus x squared minus y squared becomes four minus r squared.
And now, the integral that we have to do over r and theta, well, we look again at the shadow. The shadow is still a disk of radius root two. That hasn't changed. And now, we know how to set up this integral in polar coordinates. r goes from zero to root two, and theta goes from zero to two pi. OK, and now it becomes actually easier to evaluate. OK, so now we have actually a name for this because we're doing it in space. So, these are called, actually, cylindrical coordinates. So, in fact, you already knew about cylindrical coordinates even if you did not know the name.
OK, so the idea of cylindrical coordinates is that instead of x, y, and z, to locate a point in space, you will use three coordinates. One of them is basically how high it is above the xy plane. So, that will be z. And then, you will use polar coordinates for the projection of your point on the xy plane. So, r will be the distance from the z axis. And theta will be the angle from the x axis counterclockwise. So, the one thing to be careful about is because of the usual convention, that we make the x axis point toward us. Theta equals zero is no longer to the right. Now, theta equals zero is to the front, and the angel is measured from the front counterclockwise.
OK, so, and of course, if you want to know how to convert between x, y, z and r theta z, well, the formulas are just the same as in usual polar coordinates. R cos theta, r sine theta, and z remain z. OK, so why are these called cylindrical coordinates, by the way? Well, let's say that I gave you the equation r equals a, where a is some constant. Say r equals one, for example. So, r equals one in 2D, that used to be just a circle of radius one. Now, in space, a single equation actually defines a surface, not just a curve anymore. And, the set of points where r is a, well, that's all the points that are distance a from the z axis. So, in fact, what you get this way is a cylinder of radius a centered on the z axis.
OK, so that's why they are called cylindrical coordinates. By the way, so now, similarly, if you look at the equation theta equals some given value, well, so that used to be just a ray from the origin. Now, that becomes a vertical half plane. For example, if I set the value of theta and let r and z vary, well, r is always positive, but basically that means I am taking a vertical plane that comes out in this direction.
OK, any questions about cylindrical coordinates? Yes? Yeah, so I'm saying when you fix theta, you get only a half plane, not a full plane. I mean, it goes all the way up and down, but it doesn't go back to the other side of the z axis. Why? That's because r is always positive by convention. So, for example, here, we say theta is zero. At the back, we say theta is pi. We don't say theta is zero and r is negative. We say r is positive and theta is pi. It's a convention, largely. But, sticking with this convention really will help you to set up the integrals properly. I mean, otherwise there is just too much risk for mistakes. Yes?
Well, so the question is if I were to use symmetry to do this one, would I multiply by four or by two? Well, it depends on how much symmetry you are using. So, I mean, it's your choice. You can multiply by two, by four, by eight depending on how much

you cut it. So, it depends on what symmetry you use, if you use symmetry between top and bottom you'd say, well, the volume is twice the lower half. If you use the left and right half, you would say it's twice each half. If you cut it into four pieces, and so on.
So, and again, you don't have to use the symmetry. If you don't think of using polar coordinates, then it can save you from doing, you know, you can just start at zero here and here, and simplify things a tiny bit. But, OK, yes? So, to define a vertical full plane, well, first of all it depends on whether it passes through the z axis or not. If it doesn't, then you'd have to remember how you do in polar coordinates. I mean, basically the answer is, if you have a vertical plane, so, it doesn't depend on z. The equation does not involve z. It only involves r and theta. And, how it involves r and theta is exactly the same as when you do a line in polar coordinates in the plane. So, if it's a line passing through the origin, you say, well, theta is either some value or the other one.
If it's a line that doesn't passes to the origin, but it's more tricky. But hopefully you've seen how to do that. OK, let's move on a bit. So, one thing to know, I mean, basically, the important thing to remember is that the volume element in cylindrical coordinates, well, dx dy dz becomes r dr d theta dz. And, that shouldn't be surprising because that's just dx dy becomes r dr d theta. And, dz remains dz. I mean, so, the way to think about it, if you want, is that if you take a little piece of solid in space, so it has some height, delta z, and it has a base which has some area delta A, then the small volume, delta v, is equal to the area of a base times the height.
So, now, when you make the things infinitely small, you will get dV is dA times dz, and you can use whichever formula you want for area in the xy plane. OK, now in practice, you choose which order you integrate in. As you have probably seen, a favorite of mine is z first because very often you'll know what the top and bottom of your solid look like, and then you will reduce to just something in the xy plane.
But, there might be situations where it's actually easier to start first with dx dy or r dr d theta, and then save dz for last. I mean, if you seen how to, in single variable calculus, the disk and shell methods for finding volumes, that's exactly the dilemma of shells versus disks. One of them is you do z first. The other is you do z last. OK, so what are things we can do now with triple integrals? Well, we can find the volume of solids by just integrating dV. And, we've seen that. We can find the mass of a solid. OK, so if we have a density, delta, which, remember, delta is basically the mass divided by the volume.
OK, so the small mass element, maybe I should have written that as dm, the mass element, is density times dV. So now, this is the real physical density. If you are given a material, usually, the density will be in grams per cubic meter or cubic inch, or whatever. I mean, there is tons of different units. But, so then, the mass of your solid will be just the triple integral of density, dV because you just sum the mass of each little piece. And, of course, if the density is one, then it just becomes the volume. OK, now, it shouldn't be surprising to you that we can also do classics that we had seen in the plane such as the average value of a function, the center of mass, and moment of inertia.
OK, so the average value of the function f of x, y, z in the region, r, that would be f bar, would be one over the volume of the region times the triple integral of f dV. Or, if we have a density, and we want to take a weighted average -- Then we take one

over the mass where the mass is the triple integral of the density times the triple integral of f density dV. So, as particular cases, there is, again, the notion of center of mass of the solid. So, that's the point that somehow right in the middle of the solid. That's the point mass by which there is a point at which you should put point mass so that it would be equivalent from the point of view of dealing with forces and translation effects, of course, not for rotation. But, so the center of mass of a solid is just given by taking the average values of x, y, and z.
OK, so there is a special case where, so, x bar is one over the mass times triple integral of x density dV. And, same thing with y and z. And, of course, very often, you can use symmetry to not have to compute all three of them. For example, if you look at this solid that we had, well, I guess I've erased it now. But, if you remember what it looked, well, it was pretty obvious that the center of mass would be in the z axis. So, no need to waste time considering x bar and y bar.
And, in fact, you can also find z bar by symmetry between the top and bottom, and let you figure that out. Of course, symmetry only works, I should say, symmetry only works if the density is also symmetric. If I had taken my guy to be heavier at the front than at the back, then it would no longer be true that x bar would be zero. OK, next on the list is moment of inertia. Actually, in a way, moment of inertia in 3D is easier conceptually than in 2D. So, why is that? Well, because now the various flavors that we had come together in a nice way. So, the moment of inertia of an axis, sorry, with respect to an axis would be, again, given by the triple integral of the distance to the axis squared times density, times dV.
And, in particular, we have our solid. And, we might skewer it using any of the coordinate axes and then try to rotate it about one of the axes. So, we have three different possibilities, of course, the x, y, or z axis. And, so now, rotating about the z axis actually corresponds to when we were just doing things for flat objects in the xy plane. That corresponded to rotating about the origin. So, secretly, we were saying we were rotating about the point. But actually, it was just rotating about the z axis. Just I didn't want to introduce the z coordinate that we didn't actually need at the time. So --
[APPLAUSE] OK, so moment of inertia about the z axis, so, what's the distance to the z axis? Well, we've said that's exactly r. That's the cylindrical coordinate, r. So, the square of a distance is just r squared. Now, if you didn't want to do it in cylindrical coordinates then, of course, r squared is just x squared plus y squared. Square of distance from the z axis is just x squared plus y squared. Similarly, now, if you want the distance from the x axis, well, that will be y squared plus z squared.
OK, try to convince yourselves of the picture, or else just argue by symmetry: you know, if you change the positions of the axis. So, moment of inertia about the x axis is the double integral of y squared plus z squared delta dV. And moment of inertia about the y axis is the same thing, but now with x squared plus z squared. And so, now, if you try to apply these things for flat solids that are in the xy plane, so where there's no z to look at, well, you see these formulas become the old formulas that we had.
But now, they all fit together in a more symmetric way. OK, any questions about that? No? OK, so these are just formulas to remember. So, OK, let's do an example. Was there a question that I missed? No? OK, so let's find the moment of inertia about the z axis of a solid cone -- -- between z equals a times r and z equals b. So,

just to convince you that it's a cone, so, z equals a times r means the height is proportional to the distance from the z axis. So, let's look at what we get if we just do it in the plane of a blackboard. So, if I go to the right here, r is just the distance from the x axis.
The height should be proportional with proportionality factor A. So, that means I take a line with slope A. If I'm on the left, well, it's the same story except distance to the z axis is still positive. So, I get the symmetric thing. And, in fact, it doesn't matter which vertical plane I do it in. This is the same if I rotate about. See, there's no theta in here. So, it's the same in all directions. So, I claim it's a cone where the slope of the rays is A.
OK, and z equals b. Well, that just means we stop in our horizontal plane at height b. OK, so that's solid cone really just looks like this. That's our solid. OK, so it has a flat top, that circular top, and then the point is at v. The tip of it is at the origin. So, let's try to compute its moment of inertia about the z axis. So, that means maybe this is like the top that you are going to spin. And, it tells you how hard it is to actually spin that top. Actually, that's also useful if you're going to do mechanical engineering because if you are trying to design gears, and things like that that will rotate, you might want to know exactly how much effort you'll have to put to actually get them to spin, and whether you're actually going to have a strong enough engine, or whatever, to do it.
OK, so what's the moment of inertia of this guy? Well, that's the triple integral of, well, we have to choose x squared plus y squared or r squared. Let's see, I think I want to use cylindrical coordinates to do that, given the shape. So, we use r squared. I might have a density that let's say the density is one. So, I don't have density. I still have dV. Now, it will be my choice to choose between doing the dz first or doing r dr d theta first. Just to show you how it goes the other way around, let me do it r dr d theta dz this time. Then you can decide on a case-by-case basis which one you like best. OK, so if we do it in this direction, it means that in the inner and middle integrals, we've fixed a value of z.
And, for that particular value of z, we'll be actually slicing our solid by a horizontal plane, and looking at what we get, OK? So, what does that look like? Well, I fixed a value of z, and I slice my solid by a horizontal plane. Well, I'm going to get a circle certainly. What's the radius, well, a disk actually, what's the radius of the disk? Yeah, the radius of the disk should be z over a because the equation of that cone, we said it's z equals ar. So, if you flip it around, so, maybe I should switch to another blackboard. So, the equation of a cone is z equals ar, or equivalently r equals z over a.
So, for a given value of z, I will get, this guy will be a disk of radius z over a. OK, so, moment of inertia is going to be, well, we said r squared, r dr d theta dz. Now, so, to set up the inner and middle integrals, I just set up a double integral over this disk of radius z over a. So, it's easy. r goes from zero to z over a. Theta goes from zero to 2pi. OK, and then, well, if I set up the bounds for z, now it's my outer variable. So, the question I have to ask is what is the first slice? What is the last slice? So, the bottommost value of z would be zero, and the topmost would be b.
And so, that's it I get. So, exercise, it's not very hard. Try to set it up the other way around with dz first and then r dr d theta. It's pretty much the same level of difficulty. I'm sure you can do both of them. So, and also, if you want to practice

calculations, you should end up getting pi b to the five over 10a to the four if I got it right. OK, let me finish with one more example. I'm trying to give you plenty of practice because in case you haven't noticed, Monday is a holiday. So, you don't have recitation on Monday, which is good. But it means that there will be lots of stuff to cover on Wednesday. So --
Thank you. OK, so third example, let's say that I want to just set up a triple integral for the region where z is bigger than one minus y inside the unit ball centered at the origin. So, the unit ball is just, you know, well, stay inside of the unit sphere. So, its equation, if you want, would be x squared plus y squared plus z squared less than one. OK, so that's one thing you should remember. The equation of a sphere centered at the origin is x squared plus y squared plus z squared equals radius squared. And now, we are going to take this plane, z equals one minus y.
So, if you think about it, it's parallel to the x axis because there's no x in its coordinate in its equation. At the origin, the height is one. So, it starts right here at one. And, it slopes down with y with slope one. OK, so it's a plane that comes straight out here, and it intersects the sphere, so here and here, but also at other points in between. Any idea what kind of shape this is? Well, it's an ellipse, but it's even more than that. It's also a circle. If you slice a sphere by a plane, you always get a circle. But, of course, it's a slanted circle. So, if you look at it in the xy plane, if you project it to the xy plane, that you will get an ellipse. OK, so we want to look at this guy in here.
So, how do we do that? Well, so maybe I should actually draw quickly a picture. So, in the yz plane, it looks just like this, OK? But, if I look at it from above in the xy plane, then its shadow, well, see, it will sit entirely where y is positive. So, it sits entirely above here, and it goes through here and here. And, in fact, when you project that slanted circle, now you will get an ellipse.
And, well, I don't really know how to draw it well, but it should be something like this. OK, so now if you want to try to set up that double integral, sorry, the triple integral, well, so let's say we do it in rectangular coordinates because we are really evil. [LAUGHTER] So then, the bottom surface, OK, so we do it with z first. So, the bottom surface is the slanted plane. So, the bottom value would be z equals one minus y. The top value is on the sphere. So, the sphere corresponds to z equals square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you'd go from the plane to the sphere. And then, to find the bounds for x and y, you have to figure out what exactly, what the heck is this region here?
So, what is this region? Well, we have to figure out, for what values of x and y the plane is below the ellipse. So, the condition is that, sorry, the plane is below the sphere. OK, so, that's when the plane is below the sphere. That means one minus y is less than square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you have to somehow manipulate this to extract something simpler. Well, probably the only way to do it is to square both sides, one minus y squared should be less than one minus x squared minus y squared. And, if you work hard enough, you'll find quite an ugly equation. But, you can figure out what are, then, the bounds for x given y, and then set up the integral? So, just to give you a hint, the bounds on y will be zero to one.
The bounds on x, well, I'm not sure you want to see them, but in case you do, it will be from negative square root of 2y minus 2y squared to square root of 2y minus 2y squared. So, exercise, figure out how I got these by starting from that. Now, of

course, if we just wanted the volume of this guy, we wouldn't do it this way. We do symmetry, and actually we'd rotate the thing so that our spherical cap was actually centered on the z axis because that would be a much easier way to set it up. But, depending on what function we are integrating, we can't always do that.
OK, so have a nice, long weekend, and I'll see you on Tuesday.

So, it shouldn't be surprising that we will start today with triple integrals. OK, so the way triple integrals work is if I give you a function of three variables, x, y, z, and I give you some region in space, so, some solid, then I can take the integral over this region over function f dV where dV stands for the volume element. OK, so what it means is we will just take every single little piece of our solid, take the value of f there, multiply by the small volume of each little piece, and sum all these things together.
And, so this volume element here, well, for example, if you are doing the integral in rectangular coordinates, that will become dx dy dz or any permutation of that because, of course, we have lots of possible orders of integration to choose from. So, rather than bore you with theory and all sorts of complicated things, let's just do examples. And, you will see, basically, if you understand how to set up iterated integrals into variables, that you basically understand how to do them in three variables. You just have to be a bit more careful. And, there's one more step. OK, so let's take our first triple integral to be on the region.
 
So, of course, there's two different things as always. There is the region of integration and there's the function we are integrating. Now, the function we are integrating, well, it will come in handy when you actually try to evaluate the integral. But, as you can see, probably, the new part is really hard to set it up. So, the function won't really matter that much for me. So, in the examples I'll do today, functions will be kind of silly. So, for example, let's say that we want to look at the region between two paraboloids, one given by z = x ^2 y ^2.
The other is z = 4 - x ^2 - y ^2. And, so, I haven't given you, yet, the function to integrate. OK, this is not the function to integrate. This is what describes the region where I will integrate my function. And, let's say that I just want to find the volume of this region, which is the triple integral of just one dV. OK, similarly, remember, when we try to find the area of the region in the plane, we are just integrating one dA. Here we integrate one dV. that will give us the volume. Now, I know that you can imagine how to actually do this one as a double integral. But, the goal of the game is to set up the triple integral. It's not actually to find the volume.
So, what does that look like? Well, z = x ^2 y ^2, that's one of our favorite paraboloids. That's something that looks like a parabola with its bottom at the origin that you spin about the z axis. And, z equals four minus x squared minus y squared, well, that's also a paraboloid. But, this one is pointing down, and when you take x equals y equals zero, you get z equals four. So, it starts at four, and it goes down like that. OK, so the solid that we'd like to consider is what's in between in here. So, it has a curvy top which is this downward paraboloid, a curvy bottom which is the other paraboloid.
And, what about the sides? Well, do you have any idea what we get here? Yeah, it's going to be a circle because entire picture is invariant by rotation about the z axis. So, if you look at the picture just, say, in the yz plane, you get this point and that point. And, when you rotate everything around the z axis, you will just get a circle here. OK, so our goal is to find the volume of this thing, and there's lots of things I could do to simplify the calculation, or even not do it as a triple integral at all.
But, I want to actually set it up as a triple integral just to show how we do that. OK, so the first thing we need to do is choose an order of integration. And, here, well, I don't know if you can see it yet, but hopefully soon that will be intuitive to you. I claim that I would like to start by integrating first over z. What's the reason for that? Well, the reason is if I give you x and y, then you can find quickly, what's the bottom and top values of z for that choice of x and y? OK, so if I have x and y given, then I can find above that: what is the bottom z and the top z corresponding to the vertical line above that point? The portion of it that's inside our solid, so somehow, there's a bottom z and a top z.
And, so the top z is actually on the downward paraboloid. So, it's four minus x squared minus y squared. The bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared. OK, so if I want to start to set this up, I will write the triple integral. And then, so let's say I'm going to do it dz first, and then, say, dy dx. It doesn't really matter. So then, for a given value of x and y, I claim z goes from the bottom surface. The bottom face is z equals x squared plus y squared. The top face is four minus x squared minus y squared. OK, is that OK with everyone? Yeah?
Any questions so far? Yes? Why did I start with z? That's a very good question. So, I can choose whatever order I want, but let's say I did x first . Then, to find the inner

integral bounds, I would need to say, OK, I've chosen values of, see, in the inner integral, you've fixed the two other variables, and you're just going to vary that one. And, you need to find bounds for it. So, if I integrate over x first, I have to solve, answer the following question.
Say I'm given values of y and z. What are the bounds for x? So, that would mean I'm slicing my solid by lines that are parallel to the x axis. And, see, it's kind of hard to find, what are the values of x at the front and at the back? I mean, it's possible, but it's easier to actually first look for z at the top and bottom. Yes? dy dx, or dx dy? No, it's completely at random. I mean, you can see x and y play symmetric roles. So, if you look at it, it's reasonably clear that z should be the easiest one to set up first for what comes next. xy or yx, it's the same. Yes? Yes, it will be easier to use cylindrical coordinates. I'll get to that just as soon as I'm done with this one. OK, so let's continue a bit with that. And, as you mentioned, actually we don't actually want to do it with xy in the end.
In a few minutes, we will actually switch to cylindrical coordinates. But, for now, we don't even know what they are. OK, so I've done the inner integral by looking at, you know, if I slice by vertical lines, what is the top? What is the bottom for a given value of x and y? So, the bounds in the inner integral depend on both the middle and outer variables. Next, I need to figure out what values of x and y I will be interested in. And, the answer for that is, well, the values of x and y that I want to look at are all those that are in the shade of my region. So, in fact, to set up the middle and outer bounds, what I want to do is project my solid. So, my solid looks like this kind of thing.
And, I don't really know how to call it. But, what's interesting now is I want to look at the shadow that it casts in the xy plane. OK, and, of course, that shadow will just be the disk that's directly below this disk here that's separating the two halves of the solid. And so, now I will want to integrate over, I want to look at all the xy's, x and y, in the shadow. So, now I'm left with, actually, something we've already done, namely setting up a double integral over x and y. So, if it helps, here, we don't strictly need it, but if it helps, it could be useful to actually draw a picture of this shadow in the xy plane.
So, here it would just look, again, like a disk, and set it up. Now, the question is, how do we find the size of this disk, the size of the shadow? Well, basically we have to figure out where our two paraboloids intersect. There's nothing else. OK, so, one way how to find the shadow in the xy plane -- -- well, here we actually know the answer a priori, but even if we didn't, we could just say, well, our region lives wherever the bottom surface is below the top surface, OK, so we want to look at things wherever bottom value of z is less than the top value of z, I mean, less or less than or equal, that's the same thing.
So, if the bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared should be less than four minus x squared minus y squared, and if you solve for that, then you will get, well, so let's move these guys over here. You'll get two x squared plus two y squared less than four. That becomes x squared plus y squared less than two. So, that means that's a disk of radius square root of two, OK? So, we kind of knew in advance it was going to be a disk, but what we've learned now is that this radius is square root of two.

So, if we want to set up, if we really want to set it up using dy dx like they started, then we can do it because we know, so, for the middle integral, now, we want to fix a value of x. And, for that fixed value of x, we want to figure out the bounds for y. Well, the answer is y goes from here to here. What's here? Well, here, y is square root of two minus x squared. And, here it's negative square root of two minus x squared.
So, y will go from negative square root of two minus x squared to positive square root. And then, x will go from negative root two to root two. OK, if that's not completely clear to you, then I encourage you to go over how we set up double integrals again. OK, does that make sense, kind of? Yeah? Well, so, when we set up, remember, we are setting up a double integral, dy dx here. So, when we do it dy dx, it means we slice this region of a plane by vertical line segments. So, this middle guy would be what used to be the inner integral. So, in the inner, remember, you fix the value of x, and you ask yourself, what is the range of values of y in my region? So, y goes from here to here, and what here and here are depends on the value of x.
How? Well, we have to find the relation between x and y at these points. These points are on the circle of radius root two. So, if you want this circle maybe I should have written, is x squared plus y squared equals two. And, if you solve for y, given x, you get plus minus root of two minus x squared, OK? Yes? Is there a way to compute this with symmetry? Well, certainly, yeah, this solid looks sufficiently symmetric, but actually you could certainly, if you don't want to do the whole disk, you could just do quarter disks, and multiply by four. You could even just look at the lower half of the solid, and multiply them by two, so, total by eight.
So, yeah, certainly there's lots of ways to make it slightly easier by using symmetry. Now, the most spectacular way to use symmetry here, of course, is to use that we have this rotation symmetry and switch, actually, not do this guy in xy coordinates but instead in polar coordinates. So -- So, the smarter thing to do would be to use polar coordinates instead of x and y. Of course, we want to keep z. I mean, we are very happy with z the way it is. But, we'll just change x and y to R cos theta, R sine theta, OK, because, well, let's see actually how we would evaluate this guy.
So, well actually, let's not. It's kind of boring. So, let me just point out one small thing here, sorry, before I do that. So, if you start computing the inner integral, OK, so let me not do that yet, sorry, so if you try to compute the inner integral, you'll be integrating from x squared plus y squared to four minus x squared minus y squared dz. Well, that will integrate to z between these two bounds. So, you will get four minus two x squared minus two y squared. Now, when you put that into the remaining ones, you'll get something that's probably not very pleasant of four minus two x squared minus two y squared dy dx.
And here, you see that to evaluate this, you would switch to polar coordinates. Oh, by the way, so if your initial instincts had been to, given that you just want the volume, you could also have found the volume just by doing a double integral of the height between the top and bottom. Well, you would just have gotten this, right, because this is the height between top and bottom. So, it's all the same. It doesn't really matter. But with this, of course, we will be able to integrate all sorts of functions, not just one over the solid. So, we will be able to do much more than just volumes. OK, so let's see, how do we do it with polar coordinates instead? Well, so --

Well, that would become, so let's see. So, I want to keep dz. But then, dx dy or dy dx would become r dr d theta. And, if I try to set up the bounds, well, I probably shouldn't keep this x squared plus y squared around. But, x squared plus y squared is easy in terms of r and theta. That's just r squared. OK, I mean, in general I could have something that depends also on theta. That's perfectly legitimate. But here, it simplifies, and this guy up here, four minus x squared minus y squared becomes four minus r squared.
And now, the integral that we have to do over r and theta, well, we look again at the shadow. The shadow is still a disk of radius root two. That hasn't changed. And now, we know how to set up this integral in polar coordinates. r goes from zero to root two, and theta goes from zero to two pi. OK, and now it becomes actually easier to evaluate. OK, so now we have actually a name for this because we're doing it in space. So, these are called, actually, cylindrical coordinates. So, in fact, you already knew about cylindrical coordinates even if you did not know the name.
OK, so the idea of cylindrical coordinates is that instead of x, y, and z, to locate a point in space, you will use three coordinates. One of them is basically how high it is above the xy plane. So, that will be z. And then, you will use polar coordinates for the projection of your point on the xy plane. So, r will be the distance from the z axis. And theta will be the angle from the x axis counterclockwise. So, the one thing to be careful about is because of the usual convention, that we make the x axis point toward us. Theta equals zero is no longer to the right. Now, theta equals zero is to the front, and the angel is measured from the front counterclockwise.
OK, so, and of course, if you want to know how to convert between x, y, z and r theta z, well, the formulas are just the same as in usual polar coordinates. R cos theta, r sine theta, and z remain z. OK, so why are these called cylindrical coordinates, by the way? Well, let's say that I gave you the equation r equals a, where a is some constant. Say r equals one, for example. So, r equals one in 2D, that used to be just a circle of radius one. Now, in space, a single equation actually defines a surface, not just a curve anymore. And, the set of points where r is a, well, that's all the points that are distance a from the z axis. So, in fact, what you get this way is a cylinder of radius a centered on the z axis.
OK, so that's why they are called cylindrical coordinates. By the way, so now, similarly, if you look at the equation theta equals some given value, well, so that used to be just a ray from the origin. Now, that becomes a vertical half plane. For example, if I set the value of theta and let r and z vary, well, r is always positive, but basically that means I am taking a vertical plane that comes out in this direction.
OK, any questions about cylindrical coordinates? Yes? Yeah, so I'm saying when you fix theta, you get only a half plane, not a full plane. I mean, it goes all the way up and down, but it doesn't go back to the other side of the z axis. Why? That's because r is always positive by convention. So, for example, here, we say theta is zero. At the back, we say theta is pi. We don't say theta is zero and r is negative. We say r is positive and theta is pi. It's a convention, largely. But, sticking with this convention really will help you to set up the integrals properly. I mean, otherwise there is just too much risk for mistakes. Yes?
Well, so the question is if I were to use symmetry to do this one, would I multiply by four or by two? Well, it depends on how much symmetry you are using. So, I mean, it's your choice. You can multiply by two, by four, by eight depending on how much

you cut it. So, it depends on what symmetry you use, if you use symmetry between top and bottom you'd say, well, the volume is twice the lower half. If you use the left and right half, you would say it's twice each half. If you cut it into four pieces, and so on.
So, and again, you don't have to use the symmetry. If you don't think of using polar coordinates, then it can save you from doing, you know, you can just start at zero here and here, and simplify things a tiny bit. But, OK, yes? So, to define a vertical full plane, well, first of all it depends on whether it passes through the z axis or not. If it doesn't, then you'd have to remember how you do in polar coordinates. I mean, basically the answer is, if you have a vertical plane, so, it doesn't depend on z. The equation does not involve z. It only involves r and theta. And, how it involves r and theta is exactly the same as when you do a line in polar coordinates in the plane. So, if it's a line passing through the origin, you say, well, theta is either some value or the other one.
If it's a line that doesn't passes to the origin, but it's more tricky. But hopefully you've seen how to do that. OK, let's move on a bit. So, one thing to know, I mean, basically, the important thing to remember is that the volume element in cylindrical coordinates, well, dx dy dz becomes r dr d theta dz. And, that shouldn't be surprising because that's just dx dy becomes r dr d theta. And, dz remains dz. I mean, so, the way to think about it, if you want, is that if you take a little piece of solid in space, so it has some height, delta z, and it has a base which has some area delta A, then the small volume, delta v, is equal to the area of a base times the height.
So, now, when you make the things infinitely small, you will get dV is dA times dz, and you can use whichever formula you want for area in the xy plane. OK, now in practice, you choose which order you integrate in. As you have probably seen, a favorite of mine is z first because very often you'll know what the top and bottom of your solid look like, and then you will reduce to just something in the xy plane.
But, there might be situations where it's actually easier to start first with dx dy or r dr d theta, and then save dz for last. I mean, if you seen how to, in single variable calculus, the disk and shell methods for finding volumes, that's exactly the dilemma of shells versus disks. One of them is you do z first. The other is you do z last. OK, so what are things we can do now with triple integrals? Well, we can find the volume of solids by just integrating dV. And, we've seen that. We can find the mass of a solid. OK, so if we have a density, delta, which, remember, delta is basically the mass divided by the volume.
OK, so the small mass element, maybe I should have written that as dm, the mass element, is density times dV. So now, this is the real physical density. If you are given a material, usually, the density will be in grams per cubic meter or cubic inch, or whatever. I mean, there is tons of different units. But, so then, the mass of your solid will be just the triple integral of density, dV because you just sum the mass of each little piece. And, of course, if the density is one, then it just becomes the volume. OK, now, it shouldn't be surprising to you that we can also do classics that we had seen in the plane such as the average value of a function, the center of mass, and moment of inertia.
OK, so the average value of the function f of x, y, z in the region, r, that would be f bar, would be one over the volume of the region times the triple integral of f dV. Or, if we have a density, and we want to take a weighted average -- Then we take one

over the mass where the mass is the triple integral of the density times the triple integral of f density dV. So, as particular cases, there is, again, the notion of center of mass of the solid. So, that's the point that somehow right in the middle of the solid. That's the point mass by which there is a point at which you should put point mass so that it would be equivalent from the point of view of dealing with forces and translation effects, of course, not for rotation. But, so the center of mass of a solid is just given by taking the average values of x, y, and z.
OK, so there is a special case where, so, x bar is one over the mass times triple integral of x density dV. And, same thing with y and z. And, of course, very often, you can use symmetry to not have to compute all three of them. For example, if you look at this solid that we had, well, I guess I've erased it now. But, if you remember what it looked, well, it was pretty obvious that the center of mass would be in the z axis. So, no need to waste time considering x bar and y bar.
And, in fact, you can also find z bar by symmetry between the top and bottom, and let you figure that out. Of course, symmetry only works, I should say, symmetry only works if the density is also symmetric. If I had taken my guy to be heavier at the front than at the back, then it would no longer be true that x bar would be zero. OK, next on the list is moment of inertia. Actually, in a way, moment of inertia in 3D is easier conceptually than in 2D. So, why is that? Well, because now the various flavors that we had come together in a nice way. So, the moment of inertia of an axis, sorry, with respect to an axis would be, again, given by the triple integral of the distance to the axis squared times density, times dV.
And, in particular, we have our solid. And, we might skewer it using any of the coordinate axes and then try to rotate it about one of the axes. So, we have three different possibilities, of course, the x, y, or z axis. And, so now, rotating about the z axis actually corresponds to when we were just doing things for flat objects in the xy plane. That corresponded to rotating about the origin. So, secretly, we were saying we were rotating about the point. But actually, it was just rotating about the z axis. Just I didn't want to introduce the z coordinate that we didn't actually need at the time. So --
[APPLAUSE] OK, so moment of inertia about the z axis, so, what's the distance to the z axis? Well, we've said that's exactly r. That's the cylindrical coordinate, r. So, the square of a distance is just r squared. Now, if you didn't want to do it in cylindrical coordinates then, of course, r squared is just x squared plus y squared. Square of distance from the z axis is just x squared plus y squared. Similarly, now, if you want the distance from the x axis, well, that will be y squared plus z squared.
OK, try to convince yourselves of the picture, or else just argue by symmetry: you know, if you change the positions of the axis. So, moment of inertia about the x axis is the double integral of y squared plus z squared delta dV. And moment of inertia about the y axis is the same thing, but now with x squared plus z squared. And so, now, if you try to apply these things for flat solids that are in the xy plane, so where there's no z to look at, well, you see these formulas become the old formulas that we had.
But now, they all fit together in a more symmetric way. OK, any questions about that? No? OK, so these are just formulas to remember. So, OK, let's do an example. Was there a question that I missed? No? OK, so let's find the moment of inertia about the z axis of a solid cone -- -- between z equals a times r and z equals b. So,

just to convince you that it's a cone, so, z equals a times r means the height is proportional to the distance from the z axis. So, let's look at what we get if we just do it in the plane of a blackboard. So, if I go to the right here, r is just the distance from the x axis.
The height should be proportional with proportionality factor A. So, that means I take a line with slope A. If I'm on the left, well, it's the same story except distance to the z axis is still positive. So, I get the symmetric thing. And, in fact, it doesn't matter which vertical plane I do it in. This is the same if I rotate about. See, there's no theta in here. So, it's the same in all directions. So, I claim it's a cone where the slope of the rays is A.
OK, and z equals b. Well, that just means we stop in our horizontal plane at height b. OK, so that's solid cone really just looks like this. That's our solid. OK, so it has a flat top, that circular top, and then the point is at v. The tip of it is at the origin. So, let's try to compute its moment of inertia about the z axis. So, that means maybe this is like the top that you are going to spin. And, it tells you how hard it is to actually spin that top. Actually, that's also useful if you're going to do mechanical engineering because if you are trying to design gears, and things like that that will rotate, you might want to know exactly how much effort you'll have to put to actually get them to spin, and whether you're actually going to have a strong enough engine, or whatever, to do it.
OK, so what's the moment of inertia of this guy? Well, that's the triple integral of, well, we have to choose x squared plus y squared or r squared. Let's see, I think I want to use cylindrical coordinates to do that, given the shape. So, we use r squared. I might have a density that let's say the density is one. So, I don't have density. I still have dV. Now, it will be my choice to choose between doing the dz first or doing r dr d theta first. Just to show you how it goes the other way around, let me do it r dr d theta dz this time. Then you can decide on a case-by-case basis which one you like best. OK, so if we do it in this direction, it means that in the inner and middle integrals, we've fixed a value of z.
And, for that particular value of z, we'll be actually slicing our solid by a horizontal plane, and looking at what we get, OK? So, what does that look like? Well, I fixed a value of z, and I slice my solid by a horizontal plane. Well, I'm going to get a circle certainly. What's the radius, well, a disk actually, what's the radius of the disk? Yeah, the radius of the disk should be z over a because the equation of that cone, we said it's z equals ar. So, if you flip it around, so, maybe I should switch to another blackboard. So, the equation of a cone is z equals ar, or equivalently r equals z over a.
So, for a given value of z, I will get, this guy will be a disk of radius z over a. OK, so, moment of inertia is going to be, well, we said r squared, r dr d theta dz. Now, so, to set up the inner and middle integrals, I just set up a double integral over this disk of radius z over a. So, it's easy. r goes from zero to z over a. Theta goes from zero to 2pi. OK, and then, well, if I set up the bounds for z, now it's my outer variable. So, the question I have to ask is what is the first slice? What is the last slice? So, the bottommost value of z would be zero, and the topmost would be b.
And so, that's it I get. So, exercise, it's not very hard. Try to set it up the other way around with dz first and then r dr d theta. It's pretty much the same level of difficulty. I'm sure you can do both of them. So, and also, if you want to practice

calculations, you should end up getting pi b to the five over 10a to the four if I got it right. OK, let me finish with one more example. I'm trying to give you plenty of practice because in case you haven't noticed, Monday is a holiday. So, you don't have recitation on Monday, which is good. But it means that there will be lots of stuff to cover on Wednesday. So --
Thank you. OK, so third example, let's say that I want to just set up a triple integral for the region where z is bigger than one minus y inside the unit ball centered at the origin. So, the unit ball is just, you know, well, stay inside of the unit sphere. So, its equation, if you want, would be x squared plus y squared plus z squared less than one. OK, so that's one thing you should remember. The equation of a sphere centered at the origin is x squared plus y squared plus z squared equals radius squared. And now, we are going to take this plane, z equals one minus y.
So, if you think about it, it's parallel to the x axis because there's no x in its coordinate in its equation. At the origin, the height is one. So, it starts right here at one. And, it slopes down with y with slope one. OK, so it's a plane that comes straight out here, and it intersects the sphere, so here and here, but also at other points in between. Any idea what kind of shape this is? Well, it's an ellipse, but it's even more than that. It's also a circle. If you slice a sphere by a plane, you always get a circle. But, of course, it's a slanted circle. So, if you look at it in the xy plane, if you project it to the xy plane, that you will get an ellipse. OK, so we want to look at this guy in here.
So, how do we do that? Well, so maybe I should actually draw quickly a picture. So, in the yz plane, it looks just like this, OK? But, if I look at it from above in the xy plane, then its shadow, well, see, it will sit entirely where y is positive. So, it sits entirely above here, and it goes through here and here. And, in fact, when you project that slanted circle, now you will get an ellipse.
And, well, I don't really know how to draw it well, but it should be something like this. OK, so now if you want to try to set up that double integral, sorry, the triple integral, well, so let's say we do it in rectangular coordinates because we are really evil. [LAUGHTER] So then, the bottom surface, OK, so we do it with z first. So, the bottom surface is the slanted plane. So, the bottom value would be z equals one minus y. The top value is on the sphere. So, the sphere corresponds to z equals square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you'd go from the plane to the sphere. And then, to find the bounds for x and y, you have to figure out what exactly, what the heck is this region here?
So, what is this region? Well, we have to figure out, for what values of x and y the plane is below the ellipse. So, the condition is that, sorry, the plane is below the sphere. OK, so, that's when the plane is below the sphere. That means one minus y is less than square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you have to somehow manipulate this to extract something simpler. Well, probably the only way to do it is to square both sides, one minus y squared should be less than one minus x squared minus y squared. And, if you work hard enough, you'll find quite an ugly equation. But, you can figure out what are, then, the bounds for x given y, and then set up the integral? So, just to give you a hint, the bounds on y will be zero to one.
The bounds on x, well, I'm not sure you want to see them, but in case you do, it will be from negative square root of 2y minus 2y squared to square root of 2y minus 2y squared. So, exercise, figure out how I got these by starting from that. Now, of

course, if we just wanted the volume of this guy, we wouldn't do it this way. We do symmetry, and actually we'd rotate the thing so that our spherical cap was actually centered on the z axis because that would be a much easier way to set it up. But, depending on what function we are integrating, we can't always do that.
OK, so have a nice, long weekend, and I'll see you on Tuesday.

So, it shouldn't be surprising that we will start today with triple integrals. OK, so the way triple integrals work is if I give you a function of three variables, x, y, z, and I give you some region in space, so, some solid, then I can take the integral over this region over function f dV where dV stands for the volume element. OK, so what it means is we will just take every single little piece of our solid, take the value of f there, multiply by the small volume of each little piece, and sum all these things together.
And, so this volume element here, well, for example, if you are doing the integral in rectangular coordinates, that will become dx dy dz or any permutation of that because, of course, we have lots of possible orders of integration to choose from. So, rather than bore you with theory and all sorts of complicated things, let's just do examples. And, you will see, basically, if you understand how to set up iterated integrals into variables, that you basically understand how to do them in three variables. You just have to be a bit more careful. And, there's one more step. OK, so let's take our first triple integral to be on the region.
 
So, of course, there's two different things as always. There is the region of integration and there's the function we are integrating. Now, the function we are integrating, well, it will come in handy when you actually try to evaluate the integral. But, as you can see, probably, the new part is really hard to set it up. So, the function won't really matter that much for me. So, in the examples I'll do today, functions will be kind of silly. So, for example, let's say that we want to look at the region between two paraboloids, one given by z = x ^2 y ^2.
The other is z = 4 - x ^2 - y ^2. And, so, I haven't given you, yet, the function to integrate. OK, this is not the function to integrate. This is what describes the region where I will integrate my function. And, let's say that I just want to find the volume of this region, which is the triple integral of just one dV. OK, similarly, remember, when we try to find the area of the region in the plane, we are just integrating one dA. Here we integrate one dV. that will give us the volume. Now, I know that you can imagine how to actually do this one as a double integral. But, the goal of the game is to set up the triple integral. It's not actually to find the volume.
So, what does that look like? Well, z = x ^2 y ^2, that's one of our favorite paraboloids. That's something that looks like a parabola with its bottom at the origin that you spin about the z axis. And, z equals four minus x squared minus y squared, well, that's also a paraboloid. But, this one is pointing down, and when you take x equals y equals zero, you get z equals four. So, it starts at four, and it goes down like that. OK, so the solid that we'd like to consider is what's in between in here. So, it has a curvy top which is this downward paraboloid, a curvy bottom which is the other paraboloid.
And, what about the sides? Well, do you have any idea what we get here? Yeah, it's going to be a circle because entire picture is invariant by rotation about the z axis. So, if you look at the picture just, say, in the yz plane, you get this point and that point. And, when you rotate everything around the z axis, you will just get a circle here. OK, so our goal is to find the volume of this thing, and there's lots of things I could do to simplify the calculation, or even not do it as a triple integral at all.
But, I want to actually set it up as a triple integral just to show how we do that. OK, so the first thing we need to do is choose an order of integration. And, here, well, I don't know if you can see it yet, but hopefully soon that will be intuitive to you. I claim that I would like to start by integrating first over z. What's the reason for that? Well, the reason is if I give you x and y, then you can find quickly, what's the bottom and top values of z for that choice of x and y? OK, so if I have x and y given, then I can find above that: what is the bottom z and the top z corresponding to the vertical line above that point? The portion of it that's inside our solid, so somehow, there's a bottom z and a top z.
And, so the top z is actually on the downward paraboloid. So, it's four minus x squared minus y squared. The bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared. OK, so if I want to start to set this up, I will write the triple integral. And then, so let's say I'm going to do it dz first, and then, say, dy dx. It doesn't really matter. So then, for a given value of x and y, I claim z goes from the bottom surface. The bottom face is z equals x squared plus y squared. The top face is four minus x squared minus y squared. OK, is that OK with everyone? Yeah?
Any questions so far? Yes? Why did I start with z? That's a very good question. So, I can choose whatever order I want, but let's say I did x first . Then, to find the inner

integral bounds, I would need to say, OK, I've chosen values of, see, in the inner integral, you've fixed the two other variables, and you're just going to vary that one. And, you need to find bounds for it. So, if I integrate over x first, I have to solve, answer the following question.
Say I'm given values of y and z. What are the bounds for x? So, that would mean I'm slicing my solid by lines that are parallel to the x axis. And, see, it's kind of hard to find, what are the values of x at the front and at the back? I mean, it's possible, but it's easier to actually first look for z at the top and bottom. Yes? dy dx, or dx dy? No, it's completely at random. I mean, you can see x and y play symmetric roles. So, if you look at it, it's reasonably clear that z should be the easiest one to set up first for what comes next. xy or yx, it's the same. Yes? Yes, it will be easier to use cylindrical coordinates. I'll get to that just as soon as I'm done with this one. OK, so let's continue a bit with that. And, as you mentioned, actually we don't actually want to do it with xy in the end.
In a few minutes, we will actually switch to cylindrical coordinates. But, for now, we don't even know what they are. OK, so I've done the inner integral by looking at, you know, if I slice by vertical lines, what is the top? What is the bottom for a given value of x and y? So, the bounds in the inner integral depend on both the middle and outer variables. Next, I need to figure out what values of x and y I will be interested in. And, the answer for that is, well, the values of x and y that I want to look at are all those that are in the shade of my region. So, in fact, to set up the middle and outer bounds, what I want to do is project my solid. So, my solid looks like this kind of thing.
And, I don't really know how to call it. But, what's interesting now is I want to look at the shadow that it casts in the xy plane. OK, and, of course, that shadow will just be the disk that's directly below this disk here that's separating the two halves of the solid. And so, now I will want to integrate over, I want to look at all the xy's, x and y, in the shadow. So, now I'm left with, actually, something we've already done, namely setting up a double integral over x and y. So, if it helps, here, we don't strictly need it, but if it helps, it could be useful to actually draw a picture of this shadow in the xy plane.
So, here it would just look, again, like a disk, and set it up. Now, the question is, how do we find the size of this disk, the size of the shadow? Well, basically we have to figure out where our two paraboloids intersect. There's nothing else. OK, so, one way how to find the shadow in the xy plane -- -- well, here we actually know the answer a priori, but even if we didn't, we could just say, well, our region lives wherever the bottom surface is below the top surface, OK, so we want to look at things wherever bottom value of z is less than the top value of z, I mean, less or less than or equal, that's the same thing.
So, if the bottom value of z is x squared plus y squared should be less than four minus x squared minus y squared, and if you solve for that, then you will get, well, so let's move these guys over here. You'll get two x squared plus two y squared less than four. That becomes x squared plus y squared less than two. So, that means that's a disk of radius square root of two, OK? So, we kind of knew in advance it was going to be a disk, but what we've learned now is that this radius is square root of two.

So, if we want to set up, if we really want to set it up using dy dx like they started, then we can do it because we know, so, for the middle integral, now, we want to fix a value of x. And, for that fixed value of x, we want to figure out the bounds for y. Well, the answer is y goes from here to here. What's here? Well, here, y is square root of two minus x squared. And, here it's negative square root of two minus x squared.
So, y will go from negative square root of two minus x squared to positive square root. And then, x will go from negative root two to root two. OK, if that's not completely clear to you, then I encourage you to go over how we set up double integrals again. OK, does that make sense, kind of? Yeah? Well, so, when we set up, remember, we are setting up a double integral, dy dx here. So, when we do it dy dx, it means we slice this region of a plane by vertical line segments. So, this middle guy would be what used to be the inner integral. So, in the inner, remember, you fix the value of x, and you ask yourself, what is the range of values of y in my region? So, y goes from here to here, and what here and here are depends on the value of x.
How? Well, we have to find the relation between x and y at these points. These points are on the circle of radius root two. So, if you want this circle maybe I should have written, is x squared plus y squared equals two. And, if you solve for y, given x, you get plus minus root of two minus x squared, OK? Yes? Is there a way to compute this with symmetry? Well, certainly, yeah, this solid looks sufficiently symmetric, but actually you could certainly, if you don't want to do the whole disk, you could just do quarter disks, and multiply by four. You could even just look at the lower half of the solid, and multiply them by two, so, total by eight.
So, yeah, certainly there's lots of ways to make it slightly easier by using symmetry. Now, the most spectacular way to use symmetry here, of course, is to use that we have this rotation symmetry and switch, actually, not do this guy in xy coordinates but instead in polar coordinates. So -- So, the smarter thing to do would be to use polar coordinates instead of x and y. Of course, we want to keep z. I mean, we are very happy with z the way it is. But, we'll just change x and y to R cos theta, R sine theta, OK, because, well, let's see actually how we would evaluate this guy.
So, well actually, let's not. It's kind of boring. So, let me just point out one small thing here, sorry, before I do that. So, if you start computing the inner integral, OK, so let me not do that yet, sorry, so if you try to compute the inner integral, you'll be integrating from x squared plus y squared to four minus x squared minus y squared dz. Well, that will integrate to z between these two bounds. So, you will get four minus two x squared minus two y squared. Now, when you put that into the remaining ones, you'll get something that's probably not very pleasant of four minus two x squared minus two y squared dy dx.
And here, you see that to evaluate this, you would switch to polar coordinates. Oh, by the way, so if your initial instincts had been to, given that you just want the volume, you could also have found the volume just by doing a double integral of the height between the top and bottom. Well, you would just have gotten this, right, because this is the height between top and bottom. So, it's all the same. It doesn't really matter. But with this, of course, we will be able to integrate all sorts of functions, not just one over the solid. So, we will be able to do much more than just volumes. OK, so let's see, how do we do it with polar coordinates instead? Well, so --

Well, that would become, so let's see. So, I want to keep dz. But then, dx dy or dy dx would become r dr d theta. And, if I try to set up the bounds, well, I probably shouldn't keep this x squared plus y squared around. But, x squared plus y squared is easy in terms of r and theta. That's just r squared. OK, I mean, in general I could have something that depends also on theta. That's perfectly legitimate. But here, it simplifies, and this guy up here, four minus x squared minus y squared becomes four minus r squared.
And now, the integral that we have to do over r and theta, well, we look again at the shadow. The shadow is still a disk of radius root two. That hasn't changed. And now, we know how to set up this integral in polar coordinates. r goes from zero to root two, and theta goes from zero to two pi. OK, and now it becomes actually easier to evaluate. OK, so now we have actually a name for this because we're doing it in space. So, these are called, actually, cylindrical coordinates. So, in fact, you already knew about cylindrical coordinates even if you did not know the name.
OK, so the idea of cylindrical coordinates is that instead of x, y, and z, to locate a point in space, you will use three coordinates. One of them is basically how high it is above the xy plane. So, that will be z. And then, you will use polar coordinates for the projection of your point on the xy plane. So, r will be the distance from the z axis. And theta will be the angle from the x axis counterclockwise. So, the one thing to be careful about is because of the usual convention, that we make the x axis point toward us. Theta equals zero is no longer to the right. Now, theta equals zero is to the front, and the angel is measured from the front counterclockwise.
OK, so, and of course, if you want to know how to convert between x, y, z and r theta z, well, the formulas are just the same as in usual polar coordinates. R cos theta, r sine theta, and z remain z. OK, so why are these called cylindrical coordinates, by the way? Well, let's say that I gave you the equation r equals a, where a is some constant. Say r equals one, for example. So, r equals one in 2D, that used to be just a circle of radius one. Now, in space, a single equation actually defines a surface, not just a curve anymore. And, the set of points where r is a, well, that's all the points that are distance a from the z axis. So, in fact, what you get this way is a cylinder of radius a centered on the z axis.
OK, so that's why they are called cylindrical coordinates. By the way, so now, similarly, if you look at the equation theta equals some given value, well, so that used to be just a ray from the origin. Now, that becomes a vertical half plane. For example, if I set the value of theta and let r and z vary, well, r is always positive, but basically that means I am taking a vertical plane that comes out in this direction.
OK, any questions about cylindrical coordinates? Yes? Yeah, so I'm saying when you fix theta, you get only a half plane, not a full plane. I mean, it goes all the way up and down, but it doesn't go back to the other side of the z axis. Why? That's because r is always positive by convention. So, for example, here, we say theta is zero. At the back, we say theta is pi. We don't say theta is zero and r is negative. We say r is positive and theta is pi. It's a convention, largely. But, sticking with this convention really will help you to set up the integrals properly. I mean, otherwise there is just too much risk for mistakes. Yes?
Well, so the question is if I were to use symmetry to do this one, would I multiply by four or by two? Well, it depends on how much symmetry you are using. So, I mean, it's your choice. You can multiply by two, by four, by eight depending on how much

you cut it. So, it depends on what symmetry you use, if you use symmetry between top and bottom you'd say, well, the volume is twice the lower half. If you use the left and right half, you would say it's twice each half. If you cut it into four pieces, and so on.
So, and again, you don't have to use the symmetry. If you don't think of using polar coordinates, then it can save you from doing, you know, you can just start at zero here and here, and simplify things a tiny bit. But, OK, yes? So, to define a vertical full plane, well, first of all it depends on whether it passes through the z axis or not. If it doesn't, then you'd have to remember how you do in polar coordinates. I mean, basically the answer is, if you have a vertical plane, so, it doesn't depend on z. The equation does not involve z. It only involves r and theta. And, how it involves r and theta is exactly the same as when you do a line in polar coordinates in the plane. So, if it's a line passing through the origin, you say, well, theta is either some value or the other one.
If it's a line that doesn't passes to the origin, but it's more tricky. But hopefully you've seen how to do that. OK, let's move on a bit. So, one thing to know, I mean, basically, the important thing to remember is that the volume element in cylindrical coordinates, well, dx dy dz becomes r dr d theta dz. And, that shouldn't be surprising because that's just dx dy becomes r dr d theta. And, dz remains dz. I mean, so, the way to think about it, if you want, is that if you take a little piece of solid in space, so it has some height, delta z, and it has a base which has some area delta A, then the small volume, delta v, is equal to the area of a base times the height.
So, now, when you make the things infinitely small, you will get dV is dA times dz, and you can use whichever formula you want for area in the xy plane. OK, now in practice, you choose which order you integrate in. As you have probably seen, a favorite of mine is z first because very often you'll know what the top and bottom of your solid look like, and then you will reduce to just something in the xy plane.
But, there might be situations where it's actually easier to start first with dx dy or r dr d theta, and then save dz for last. I mean, if you seen how to, in single variable calculus, the disk and shell methods for finding volumes, that's exactly the dilemma of shells versus disks. One of them is you do z first. The other is you do z last. OK, so what are things we can do now with triple integrals? Well, we can find the volume of solids by just integrating dV. And, we've seen that. We can find the mass of a solid. OK, so if we have a density, delta, which, remember, delta is basically the mass divided by the volume.
OK, so the small mass element, maybe I should have written that as dm, the mass element, is density times dV. So now, this is the real physical density. If you are given a material, usually, the density will be in grams per cubic meter or cubic inch, or whatever. I mean, there is tons of different units. But, so then, the mass of your solid will be just the triple integral of density, dV because you just sum the mass of each little piece. And, of course, if the density is one, then it just becomes the volume. OK, now, it shouldn't be surprising to you that we can also do classics that we had seen in the plane such as the average value of a function, the center of mass, and moment of inertia.
OK, so the average value of the function f of x, y, z in the region, r, that would be f bar, would be one over the volume of the region times the triple integral of f dV. Or, if we have a density, and we want to take a weighted average -- Then we take one

over the mass where the mass is the triple integral of the density times the triple integral of f density dV. So, as particular cases, there is, again, the notion of center of mass of the solid. So, that's the point that somehow right in the middle of the solid. That's the point mass by which there is a point at which you should put point mass so that it would be equivalent from the point of view of dealing with forces and translation effects, of course, not for rotation. But, so the center of mass of a solid is just given by taking the average values of x, y, and z.
OK, so there is a special case where, so, x bar is one over the mass times triple integral of x density dV. And, same thing with y and z. And, of course, very often, you can use symmetry to not have to compute all three of them. For example, if you look at this solid that we had, well, I guess I've erased it now. But, if you remember what it looked, well, it was pretty obvious that the center of mass would be in the z axis. So, no need to waste time considering x bar and y bar.
And, in fact, you can also find z bar by symmetry between the top and bottom, and let you figure that out. Of course, symmetry only works, I should say, symmetry only works if the density is also symmetric. If I had taken my guy to be heavier at the front than at the back, then it would no longer be true that x bar would be zero. OK, next on the list is moment of inertia. Actually, in a way, moment of inertia in 3D is easier conceptually than in 2D. So, why is that? Well, because now the various flavors that we had come together in a nice way. So, the moment of inertia of an axis, sorry, with respect to an axis would be, again, given by the triple integral of the distance to the axis squared times density, times dV.
And, in particular, we have our solid. And, we might skewer it using any of the coordinate axes and then try to rotate it about one of the axes. So, we have three different possibilities, of course, the x, y, or z axis. And, so now, rotating about the z axis actually corresponds to when we were just doing things for flat objects in the xy plane. That corresponded to rotating about the origin. So, secretly, we were saying we were rotating about the point. But actually, it was just rotating about the z axis. Just I didn't want to introduce the z coordinate that we didn't actually need at the time. So --
[APPLAUSE] OK, so moment of inertia about the z axis, so, what's the distance to the z axis? Well, we've said that's exactly r. That's the cylindrical coordinate, r. So, the square of a distance is just r squared. Now, if you didn't want to do it in cylindrical coordinates then, of course, r squared is just x squared plus y squared. Square of distance from the z axis is just x squared plus y squared. Similarly, now, if you want the distance from the x axis, well, that will be y squared plus z squared.
OK, try to convince yourselves of the picture, or else just argue by symmetry: you know, if you change the positions of the axis. So, moment of inertia about the x axis is the double integral of y squared plus z squared delta dV. And moment of inertia about the y axis is the same thing, but now with x squared plus z squared. And so, now, if you try to apply these things for flat solids that are in the xy plane, so where there's no z to look at, well, you see these formulas become the old formulas that we had.
But now, they all fit together in a more symmetric way. OK, any questions about that? No? OK, so these are just formulas to remember. So, OK, let's do an example. Was there a question that I missed? No? OK, so let's find the moment of inertia about the z axis of a solid cone -- -- between z equals a times r and z equals b. So,

just to convince you that it's a cone, so, z equals a times r means the height is proportional to the distance from the z axis. So, let's look at what we get if we just do it in the plane of a blackboard. So, if I go to the right here, r is just the distance from the x axis.
The height should be proportional with proportionality factor A. So, that means I take a line with slope A. If I'm on the left, well, it's the same story except distance to the z axis is still positive. So, I get the symmetric thing. And, in fact, it doesn't matter which vertical plane I do it in. This is the same if I rotate about. See, there's no theta in here. So, it's the same in all directions. So, I claim it's a cone where the slope of the rays is A.
OK, and z equals b. Well, that just means we stop in our horizontal plane at height b. OK, so that's solid cone really just looks like this. That's our solid. OK, so it has a flat top, that circular top, and then the point is at v. The tip of it is at the origin. So, let's try to compute its moment of inertia about the z axis. So, that means maybe this is like the top that you are going to spin. And, it tells you how hard it is to actually spin that top. Actually, that's also useful if you're going to do mechanical engineering because if you are trying to design gears, and things like that that will rotate, you might want to know exactly how much effort you'll have to put to actually get them to spin, and whether you're actually going to have a strong enough engine, or whatever, to do it.
OK, so what's the moment of inertia of this guy? Well, that's the triple integral of, well, we have to choose x squared plus y squared or r squared. Let's see, I think I want to use cylindrical coordinates to do that, given the shape. So, we use r squared. I might have a density that let's say the density is one. So, I don't have density. I still have dV. Now, it will be my choice to choose between doing the dz first or doing r dr d theta first. Just to show you how it goes the other way around, let me do it r dr d theta dz this time. Then you can decide on a case-by-case basis which one you like best. OK, so if we do it in this direction, it means that in the inner and middle integrals, we've fixed a value of z.
And, for that particular value of z, we'll be actually slicing our solid by a horizontal plane, and looking at what we get, OK? So, what does that look like? Well, I fixed a value of z, and I slice my solid by a horizontal plane. Well, I'm going to get a circle certainly. What's the radius, well, a disk actually, what's the radius of the disk? Yeah, the radius of the disk should be z over a because the equation of that cone, we said it's z equals ar. So, if you flip it around, so, maybe I should switch to another blackboard. So, the equation of a cone is z equals ar, or equivalently r equals z over a.
So, for a given value of z, I will get, this guy will be a disk of radius z over a. OK, so, moment of inertia is going to be, well, we said r squared, r dr d theta dz. Now, so, to set up the inner and middle integrals, I just set up a double integral over this disk of radius z over a. So, it's easy. r goes from zero to z over a. Theta goes from zero to 2pi. OK, and then, well, if I set up the bounds for z, now it's my outer variable. So, the question I have to ask is what is the first slice? What is the last slice? So, the bottommost value of z would be zero, and the topmost would be b.
And so, that's it I get. So, exercise, it's not very hard. Try to set it up the other way around with dz first and then r dr d theta. It's pretty much the same level of difficulty. I'm sure you can do both of them. So, and also, if you want to practice

calculations, you should end up getting pi b to the five over 10a to the four if I got it right. OK, let me finish with one more example. I'm trying to give you plenty of practice because in case you haven't noticed, Monday is a holiday. So, you don't have recitation on Monday, which is good. But it means that there will be lots of stuff to cover on Wednesday. So --
Thank you. OK, so third example, let's say that I want to just set up a triple integral for the region where z is bigger than one minus y inside the unit ball centered at the origin. So, the unit ball is just, you know, well, stay inside of the unit sphere. So, its equation, if you want, would be x squared plus y squared plus z squared less than one. OK, so that's one thing you should remember. The equation of a sphere centered at the origin is x squared plus y squared plus z squared equals radius squared. And now, we are going to take this plane, z equals one minus y.
So, if you think about it, it's parallel to the x axis because there's no x in its coordinate in its equation. At the origin, the height is one. So, it starts right here at one. And, it slopes down with y with slope one. OK, so it's a plane that comes straight out here, and it intersects the sphere, so here and here, but also at other points in between. Any idea what kind of shape this is? Well, it's an ellipse, but it's even more than that. It's also a circle. If you slice a sphere by a plane, you always get a circle. But, of course, it's a slanted circle. So, if you look at it in the xy plane, if you project it to the xy plane, that you will get an ellipse. OK, so we want to look at this guy in here.
So, how do we do that? Well, so maybe I should actually draw quickly a picture. So, in the yz plane, it looks just like this, OK? But, if I look at it from above in the xy plane, then its shadow, well, see, it will sit entirely where y is positive. So, it sits entirely above here, and it goes through here and here. And, in fact, when you project that slanted circle, now you will get an ellipse.
And, well, I don't really know how to draw it well, but it should be something like this. OK, so now if you want to try to set up that double integral, sorry, the triple integral, well, so let's say we do it in rectangular coordinates because we are really evil. [LAUGHTER] So then, the bottom surface, OK, so we do it with z first. So, the bottom surface is the slanted plane. So, the bottom value would be z equals one minus y. The top value is on the sphere. So, the sphere corresponds to z equals square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you'd go from the plane to the sphere. And then, to find the bounds for x and y, you have to figure out what exactly, what the heck is this region here?
So, what is this region? Well, we have to figure out, for what values of x and y the plane is below the ellipse. So, the condition is that, sorry, the plane is below the sphere. OK, so, that's when the plane is below the sphere. That means one minus y is less than square root of one minus x squared minus y squared. So, you have to somehow manipulate this to extract something simpler. Well, probably the only way to do it is to square both sides, one minus y squared should be less than one minus x squared minus y squared. And, if you work hard enough, you'll find quite an ugly equation. But, you can figure out what are, then, the bounds for x given y, and then set up the integral? So, just to give you a hint, the bounds on y will be zero to one.
The bounds on x, well, I'm not sure you want to see them, but in case you do, it will be from negative square root of 2y minus 2y squared to square root of 2y minus 2y squared. So, exercise, figure out how I got these by starting from that. Now, of

course, if we just wanted the volume of this guy, we wouldn't do it this way. We do symmetry, and actually we'd rotate the thing so that our spherical cap was actually centered on the z axis because that would be a much easier way to set it up. But, depending on what function we are integrating, we can't always do that.
OK, so have a nice, long weekend, and I'll see you on Tuesday.

